SECTION 10: CONFERENCE CHAMPION DETERMINATION
10.1

CONFERENCE COMPETITION

10.1.1 All teams will be scheduled to play eight (8) games as part of the conference schedule. Each team
will not play five other conference teams.

10.2

TROPHY PRESENTATION

10.2.1 The American will award championship trophy to the winner of the championship game.

10.3

CHAMPIONSHIP GAME PARTICIPANT DETERMINATION

10.3.1 The two teams that complete the conference season with the highest winning percentages will be
the participants in the Conference Championship Game.
10.3.2 The conference’s tiebreaking procedures will be used to break all ties for first or second place.
10.3.3 The team that wins the championship game will be the American Football Champion.

10.4

CHAMPIONSHIP GAME PARTICIPANTS (UNBALANCED SCHEDULED)

10.4.1 For teams to be considered in a tie-break scenario to compete in the American Football
Championship, teams must play at least seven conference games in years where eight games are
scheduled.
10.4.2 The championship participants will be determined by the best winning percentages within the
conference. In the event of an unbalanced schedule where there is a tie for the best, or second
best, record in the loss column, head-to-head results will take precedence over the winning
percentage as long as the required number of conference games were completed and the team
with fewer games defeated all other tied teams. If the teams remain tied, the tie-breaking
procedures will be applied to determine the American game representatives.
10.4.3 This procedure will be applied to determine the two championship game representatives and the
championship game host.
10.4.4 This provision is subject to review by the Commissioner and the Athletic Directors from the
institutions that are not in contention to be championship game participants.

10.5

TWO-TEAM TIE

10.5.1 If there is a two-team tie for first place, both teams will play in the championship game.
10.5.2 If there is a two-team tie for second place, the head-to-head result shall determine the
championship game participant.

27

10.5.3 If there is no head-to-head result, and one of the tied teams was ranked in the latest available CFP
Selection Committee rankings and doesn’t lose in the final weekend of regular-season conference
play, it will be declared a championship game participant.
10.5.4 If there is no head-to-head result, and one of the tied teams was ranked in the latest available CFP
Selection Committee rankings and loses in the final weekend of regular-season conference play,
then a composite average of selected computer metrics (Connolly SP+, SportSource TR116 SOR,
ESPN SOR, KPI) will be used to determine the championship game participant.
10.5.5 If there is no head-to-head result, and both tied teams are ranked in the latest available CFP
Selection Committee rankings, the higher-ranked tied team that doesn’t lose in the final weekend
of the conference regular season will be a championship game participant.
10.5.6 If there is no head-to-head result, and neither of the tied ranked teams wins in the final weekend
of the conference regular season, a composite average of selected computer metrics (Connolly
SP+, SportSource TR116 SOR, ESPN SOR, KPI) after all games concludes the final weekend of the
Conference regular season will be used to determine the Championship Game participant.
10.5.7 If there is no head-to-head result, and neither of the tied teams is ranked in the latest available
CFP Selection Committee rankings going into the final weekend of the conference regular season,
a composite average of selected computer metrics (Connolly SP+, SportSource TR116 SOR, ESPN
SOR, KPI) after all teams conclude the final weekend of the conference regular season will be used
to determine the championship game participant.
10.5.8 If still tied, win percentage against all common conference opponents.
10.5.9 If still tied, the team with the highest overall winning percentage (conference and nonconference) excluding exempt games.
10.5.10 If still tied, a coin toss will be conducted by the commissioner.

10.6

MULTIPLE TEAM TIE

10.6.1 If more than two teams tie for first or second place, the tiebreaker procedures will be applied
separately to identify the two participants in the championship game.
10.6.2 If only two teams remain tied after any step in the tiebreaking process, the two-team tie
procedures shall be used to break the tie.
10.6.3 The conference records of the tied teams are compared in a mini round-robin format. If within
the mini round-robin, any of the tied teams did not play each other, the group of teams shall
remain tied unless one team defeated all other tied teams.

28

10.6.4 If the highest-ranked of the tied teams in the latest available CFP Selection Committee rankings
doesn’t lose in the final weekend of regular-season conference play, it will be declared a
championship game participant.
10.6.5 If the highest-ranked of the tied teams in the latest available CFP Selection Committee rankings
loses in the final weekend of regular-season conference play, then a composite average of
selected computer metrics (Connolly SP+, SportSource TR116 SOR, ESPN SOR, KPI) will be used to
determine the championship game participants.
10.6.6 If there are multiple tied teams ranked in the latest available CFP Selection Committee rankings,
the highest-ranked team or teams that win in the final weekend of the conference regular season
will be championship game participants.
10.6.7 If none of the ranked tied teams win in the final weekend of the conference regular season, a
composite average of selected computer metrics (Connolly SP+, SportSource TR116 SOR, ESPN
SOR, KPI) after all games conclude the final weekend of the conference regular season will be
used to determine the championship game participants.
10.6.8 If no teams are ranked in the latest available CFP Selection Committee rankings going into the
final weekend of the conference regular season, a composite average of selected computer
metrics (Connolly SP+, SportSource TR116 SOR, ESPN SOR, KPI) after all games conclude the final
weekend of the conference regular season will be used to break a tie and determine the
championship game participants.
10.6.9 If still tied, win percentage against all common conference opponents.
10.6.10 If still tied, the team with the highest overall winning percentage (conference and nonconference) excluding exempt games.
10.6.11 Drawing to be conducted by the Commissioner.

10.7

INELIGIBLE TEAM

10.7.1 If one or both American championship game participants are ineligible to play in the American
Football Championship game, then the participant(s) in the American Championship game shall
be determined by the following procedure.
10.7.2 If the ineligible team is tied with another team, then the team it tied with shall be the American
Football Championship game participant.
10.7.3 If two or more teams are tied with an ineligible team to be a championship game participant, then
the ineligible team is removed, and the remaining teams revert to the tiebreaker procedure.
10.7.4 If there is a tie for second place, then the tied teams shall revert to the tiebreaker procedure.

29

10.8

CHAMPIONSHIP HOST DETERMINATION

10.8.1 The championship game shall be played at the home venue of the championship game participant
with the highest winning percentage in conference games.
10.8.2 The following tiebreaker will be used to determine the host location for the American Football
Championship game.

10.9

CHAMPIONSHIP HOST TIE-BREAKER

10.9.1 Head-to-head results between tied teams.
10.9.2 If still tied, and only one team was ranked in the latest available CFP Selection Committee
rankings and didn’t lose in the final weekend of the conference regular season, it will be declared
the host.
10.9.3 If only one of the participants was ranked in the latest available CFP Selection Committee rankings
and loses in the final weekend of regular-season Conference play, then a composite average of
selected computer metrics (Connolly SP+, SportSource TR116 SOR, ESPN SOR, KPI) will be used to
determine the host.
10.9.4 If the higher-ranked team in the latest available CFP Selection Committee rankings loses in the
final weekend of the conference regular season, a composite average of selected computer
metrics (Connolly SP+, SportSource TR116 SOR, ESPN SOR, KPI) will be used to determine the host.
10.9.5 If both teams are ranked in the latest available CFP Selection Committee rankings, the higherranked team that doesn’t lose in the final weekend of the Conference regular season will be
declared the host.
10.9.6 If neither of the ranked teams wins in the final weekend of the conference regular season, a
composite average of selected computer metrics (Connolly SP+, SportSource TR116 SOR, ESPN
SOR, KPI) after all games conclude the final weekend of the conference regular season will be
used to determine the host.
10.9.7 If no teams are ranked in the latest available CFP Selection Committee rankings going into the
final weekend of the conference regular season, a composite average of selected computer
metrics (Connolly SP+, SportSource TR116 SOR, ESPN SOR, KPI) after all games conclude the final
weekend of the conference regular season will be used to determine the host.
10.9.8 If still tied, the best win percentage against all common conference opponents will be the host.
10.9.9 If still tied, the team with the highest overall (conference and non-conference winning percentage
[excluding exempt games] shall be the host.
10.9.10 If still tied, a coin toss will be conducted by the Commissioner.
30

10.10

INABILITY TO HOST

10.10.1 If the host institution is unable to host the championship game the other championship game
participant shall be declared the host team.

10.11

COMMISSIONER AUTHORITY & FORFEITS

10.11.1 The Commissioner or his/her designee will make the final decision regarding conference
competition. This includes cancelling, postponing, rescheduling or terminating a contest.
10.11.2 Once the Commissioner or his/her designee determines a contest will be rescheduled, the
members are required to abide by the decision. If a member does not comply with the decision
of the Commissioner or his/her designee and refuses to participate in an intraconference contest
against a fellow member institution’s team, the team refusing to participate shall be deemed to
have forfeited the game. Should both teams refuse to abide by the decision of the Commissioner
or his/her designee, the outcome will be a double-forfeit.
10.11.3 For the purposes of conference records, standings, tie-breaking formulas and American Football
Championship Participation, the forfeiting team(s) will be charged with a loss and the opposing
team credited with a win.

31
