FOOTBALL REGULATIONS
A.

Conference Championship Game. The top two teams with the highest conference winning percentage at the end of the regular
season will participate in the Conference USA Football Championship Game. If two or more teams are tied, the following six-step
tiebreaker procedure will be used to determine participants. The same criteria will be applied to determine the host institution if the
two participants have identical conference records. Member football teams that are not bowl eligible (due to transition status,
NCAA sanctions, etc.) will not have the opportunity to compete in the conference championship football game.

B.

Conference Championship Tiebreaker Procedure (Participant Selection & Hosting). In the event of a tie for a place in the
CUSA Football Championship Game, the following tiebreaking procedures will be applied, provided all teams played an equal
number of conference games. The championship game participants will be determined first, followed by the selection of the host.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Head-to-Head Competition: Winner of the head-to-head matchup is selected.
Winning Percentage Against Common Conference Opponents: The team with the higher winning percentage against
shared conference opponents shall be selected.
Record Against the Team(s) with the Best Conference Record: If still tied, compare records against the common
opponent(s) with the highest conference winning percentage, proceeding downward through the standings until the
tie is broken.
Average Computer Ranking: Higher average ranking across Connelly SP+, SportSource Analytics, ESPN SOR, and
KPI Rankings.
Cumulative Conference Winning Percentage of All Conference Opponents: Team whose opponents have the higher
combined conference winning percentage is selected.
Coin Toss: Conducted by the Commissioner or designee if all other steps fail to determine a winner.

C.

Conference Championship Tiebreaker Procedure (Unequal Number of Games). In determining the top two teams and host,
the following will apply: If any team(s) has not played an equal amount of Conference games (due to not being able to reschedule
a postponed Conference game) and any team(s) is within one Conference win from the team(s) with the highest conference winning
percentage and has an equal number of losses, those teams shall be declared tied. The championship game participants will be
determined first, followed by the selection of the host (See tiebreaker policy outlined above).

D.

Multi-Team Ties. When Comparing Records Against Groups of Tied Teams: If, during the application of the tiebreaker
procedure, a set of tied teams is encountered in the standings (for example, multiple teams tied for second place), each tied team’s
record shall be evaluated collectively against the entire group of tied teams. If the tied teams have the same record or played an
unequal number of games against the teams within the tied group, immediately advance to the team(s) with the next highest
conference winning percentage. If at any point the tie is broken in a multiple team tie, the remaining teams will begin the process
again at step #1.

E.

Contingency Plans for College Football Playoff Eligibility. In the event the game cannot be played on the scheduled date, every
effort will be made to reschedule the game, including establishing an alternative site, so that the champion will be declared prior to
the College Football Playoff (CFP) selections.
If the Conference is: (1) unable to complete the contest prior to the time in which the CFP selections are required to be made and
(2) the Conference has a team or teams eligible to participate in the CFP, then the highest ranked CFP eligible team shall be declared
the Conference USA Champion and the game will not be played. In the event the game cannot be played and the Conference does
not have a team eligible or ranked in the CFP, the Champion of the Conference will be the team with the highest winning percentage
within the Conference schedule and applicable tie-breakers (i.e. the tie-breakers utilized to determine the host of the Championship
would be the same ones utilized to determine the champion).

F.

Equipment. Teams will provide all equipment needed including game footballs.

G.

Finances.

H.

1.

Competing teams will receive reimbursement to cover expenses within established parameters (e.g., travel party
limit, set per diem, and per hosting guidelines). Relative to air travel, the Conference will reimburse visiting band
and spirit groups up to 140 band members, 14 spirit groups and one mascot for one (1) night hotel. The Conference
will approve all expenses.

2.

All game revenue (i.e., ticket sales, parking, and concessions) and all approved expenses associated with the event
will be captured and borne by the Conference. To the extent there are net revenues, 25% shall be shared by the
participants (15% to the host, 10% to the visiting team) so long as it does not exceed $150,000. All remaining net
revenue shall be shared equally.

Game Time. The game time for the Football Championship game is set by the Conference Office in consultation with the television
partner televising the contest.

90
