MOUNTAIN WEST FOOTBALL CHAMPIONSHIP TIEBREAKING
PROCEDURES
CHAMPIONSHIP GAME PARTICIPANTS & HOST DETERMINATION
The two teams that complete the Conference season with the highest winning percentages will be the Mountain
West Football Championship Game participants. The team with the highest Conference winning percentage
outright shall be declared the host for the Championship Game.
If there is a tie between two (2) or more teams for participation in and/or hosting of the Championship Game, the
following tiebreaking procedures shall be administered in numerical order to determine the participant(s) and host
for the Championship Game.
TIE BETWEEN TWO TEAMS:
1. Head-to-head result between the tied teams.
2. Highest CFP Selection Committee Ranking (or composite of selected predictive and results-based computer
metrics [Connelly SP+, ESPN SOR, KPI, and SportSource]).
a. If one team is ranked in the latest available CFP Selection Committee Ranking (November 25) and
wins on the final weekend of the regular season, they will be declared a participant (and/or host). If,
in that same scenario, the one ranked team in the latest available CFP Selection Committee Ranking
loses in the final weekend of the regular season, a composite average of selected predictive and resultsbased computer metrics after all games conclude the final weekend of the regular season will be used
to determine the participant and/or host;
- OR b. If both teams are ranked in the latest available CFP Selection Committee Ranking (November 25), the
highest-ranked team that wins on the final weekend of the regular season will be declared a participant
(and/or host);
If neither of the ranked teams win in the final weekend of the regular season, a composite average of
selected predictive and results-based computer metrics after all games conclude the final weekend of
the regular season will be used to determine the participant (and/or host);
- OR c. If neither team is ranked in the latest available CFP Selection Committee Ranking (November 25)
going into the final weekend of the regular season, a composite average of selected predictive and
results-based computer metrics after all games conclude the final weekend of the regular season will
be used to determine the participants (and/or host).
For use of composite selected predictive and results-based computer metrics, if Team A is 28.24 and
Team B is 28.34, Team A would be declared a participant (and/or host) for the football championship
game.
3. Overall winning percentage against all opponents.
a. A maximum of one win against a team from the NCAA Football Championship Subdivision shall be
included in the calculation of the winning percentage.
4. Record against the next highest-placed team in the Conference standings (based on winning percentage in all
games played within the Conference), proceeding down the standings. When comparing tied teams against

positions lower in the standings that are also tied, those lower-tied positions shall be considered a single
position for the purposes of comparison.
a. If one team did not play a certain team, move to the next highest-placed team(s) in the standings.
b. If one team did not play all teams in the group of tied teams, move to the next highest-placed in the
standings.
c. If one team did not play the lowest-placed team in the standings, move to the next step in the
tiebreaker.
5. Winning percentage against common Conference opponents.
6. Coin toss to be conducted virtually by the Commissioner.
TIE BETWEEN THREE OR MORE TEAMS:
In the event of a percentage tie between three or more teams, the following comparison procedure shall be used:
1. Head-to-head winning percentages among the tied teams are compared in a mini round-robin format until one
or more teams gain an advantage or the process reverts to the two-team tiebreak format. If, within the mini
round-robin, the teams remain tied or any of the tied teams did not play each other, the group of teams shall
remain tied, unless one team defeated all other tied teams.
2. Highest CFP Selection Committee Ranking (or composite average of selected predictive and results-based
computer metrics). The two highest-ranked tied teams will be identified using the following criteria:
a. The tied team(s) who are ranked in the latest available CFP Selection Committee Ranking (November
25) and win in the final weekend.
b. A composite average of selected predictive and results-based computer metrics for the tied team(s)
that lose in the final weekend of the regular season OR were not ranked in the latest available CFP
Selection Committee Ranking (November 25).
Note: CFP Selection Committee Ranking is superior to the composite average of selected predictive and
results-based computer metrics in (a.) and (b.) above.
Example 1. If Team A is the only ranked team at 21 and wins in the final weekend of regular season play, it
will be declared a participant in the MW Championship Game and would advance to a two-team tiebreaker to
determine the host. The second team to advance to the two-team tiebreaker will be identified using the
composite of selected predictive and results-based computer metrics (Connelly SP+, ESPN SOR, KPI, and
SportSource).
Example 2. If Team A is ranked 21, Team B is ranked 22, and Team C is ranked 23 in the CFP Selection
Committee Ranking (November 25) and all win in the final weekend of regular season play, Team A and B
would be declared participants in the MW Championship Game, and would advance to a two-team tiebreaker
to determine the host.
Example 3. If Team A is ranked 30.33, Team B is ranked 31.22, and Team C is ranked 32.11 in the composite
average of selected predictive and results-based computer metrics after all games conclude in the final
weekend of regular season play, Team A and B would be declared participants in the MW Championship Game,
and would advance to a two-team tiebreaker to determine the host.
3. Overall winning percentage against all opponents.

a. A maximum of one win against a team from the NCAA Football Championship Subdivision shall be
included in the calculation of the winning percentage.
4. Record against the next highest‐placed team in the Conference standings (based on winning percentage in all
games played within the Conference), proceeding down the standings. When comparing tied teams against
positions lower in the standings that are also tied, those lower-tied positions shall be considered a single
position for the purposes of comparison.
a. If one or all teams did not play a certain team, move to the next highest-placed team(s) in the
standings.
b. If one or all teams did not play all teams in the group of tied teams, move to the next highest-place in
the standings.
c. If one or all teams did not play the lowest-placed team in the standings, move to the next step in the
tiebreaker.
5. Winning percentage against common Conference opponents.
6. Drawing to be conducted virtually by the Commissioner to determine the two teams.
TIED GAMES
A football game which ends in a tie shall count as half‐a‐game won and half‐a‐game lost in the standings.
ELIGIBILITY
A team ineligible under NCAA or Mountain West rules for post‐season (bowl) competition shall not compete in
the Championship Game.
INABILITY TO HOST
If the host institution is unable to host the Championship Game, the other Championship Game participant shall
be declared the host team.
These provisions are subject to review by the Commissioner and the Athletic Directors.
8/22/2024
