2. Conference Football Championship Game.
The Conference shall retain all revenues generated by the Conference Football Championship Game and related activities and shall distribute all net revenues equally among the member institutions after payment of
game-related expenses. (6/11)
a. Football.
Member institutions shall be aligned into a North Division (consisting of California, Oregon, Oregon State,
Stanford, Washington, and Washington State) and a South Division (consisting of Arizona, Arizona State,
Colorado, UCLA, USC, and Utah). Conference competition shall consist of a nine-game schedule consisting
of five intra-divisional games and four inter-divisional games each year, with California, Stanford, UCLA,
and USC competing against each other each year and the remaining inter-divisional games scheduled on
a rotating basis. (10/10)
(1) Championship Game.
A Conference Championship Game shall be hosted by the divisional champion with the best won-lost
percentage in Conference games. (10/10)
b. Men’s Basketball.
Conference competition shall consist of an 18-game regular-season schedule, with the opponents to be determined annually on a rotating basis except that each team shall play its traditional rival at home and on
the road each season, and participation in a Conference postseason tournament. (6/11)
c. Women’s Basketball.
Conference competition shall consist of an 18-game regular-season schedule, with the opponents to be determined annually on a rotating basis and each team shall play its traditional rival at home and on the road
each season, and participation in a Conference postseason tournament. (6/11)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 35

Student-Athlete Well-Being

ER 6-1-d

ER 7-1-a-(1)

d. Women’s Volleyball.
Conference competition shall consist of a 20-match regular-season schedule, with the opponents to be determined annually on a rotating basis except that each team shall play its traditional rival at home and on
the road each season. (6/11)
2. Scheduling Relationships.
Membership in the Conference shall in no way affect the right of each member to continue or establish relations
with any institution, except as mandated herein. (8/85)
a. Non-Conference Neutral Site Football Games.
No member institution shall enter into an agreement to play a neutral-site football game (except in circumstances where such neutral-site game is the away leg of a home-and-home series) unless such agreement
provides the Conference with the exclusive broadcast rights and digital rights in all media, and copyright
to such neutral-site game. (5/11)
3. Conference Football Games.
In the sport of football, it shall not be required for Conference members to execute individual contracts governing play of their nine annual Conference games. Those games shall be conducted under the terms and
conditions established in SPR 6 and other applicable Conference regulations, including the provisions of ER 1,
Financial Distribution, and AR 2, Radio and Television Policies. (5/78, 12/85, 1/89, 2/92, 6/05)
Each member of the Conference at all times pertinent herein shall have been deemed to have entered into agreements for nine annual football games with the other members of the Conference and shall be guaranteed that
those games will be played as scheduled under such schedules as may be adopted by the Conference from time
to time. (5/78, 12/85, 1/89, 2/92, 6/05, 8/10, 10/10)
SPR 6-1

Football Regulations

SPR 6-1-c-(3)

CHAPTER 6—FOOTBALL REGULATIONS
1. Regular Season Policies.
a. Ambulance, Medical Doctor.
The host institution shall have an ambulance and a medical doctor available at the site of each Conference
football game throughout the contest. (2/92)
b. Ball Persons.
Ball persons shall be provided by the host institution, with the visiting institution having the option to provide its own ball persons. There shall be two ball persons on each sideline, they shall be at least 18 years of
age, and shall wear clothing provided by the Conference. If the visiting team provides its own ball persons,
there shall be four ball persons provided by each team. If the visitor brings only two ball persons, the home
team shall provide two additional ball persons to serve the visiting team. A prospective student-athlete
shall not serve as a ball person. (12/91, 6/99, 6/00, 6/06, 6/07, 10/07)
c. Band and Spirit Groups.
The host institution’s spirit squad members and mascot (all in uniform) and the members of its marching
band and associated groups shall be admitted to the game at no cost and shall be permitted to perform at
the game in accordance with Conference rules. If the visiting marching band notifies the host institution by
July 1 prior to the season that it will attend the contest, it shall be provided up to 100 complimentary seats
for its use. In addition to the 100 complimentary seats, the visiting institution’s spirit squad members and
mascot (all in uniform) shall be admitted to the game at no cost. The visiting team’s band, spirit squad and
mascot shall be permitted to perform at the game in accordance with Conference rules. It shall be permissible, at the host institution’s discretion, to increase the number of complimentary seats for the visiting
marching band. The home team band shall not be located any closer to the visiting sideline than the goal
posts. (12/84, 2/92, 7/19)
Performance on the playing field shall be at the determination of home game management, which shall
attempt to extend usual courtesies to the visiting institution’s representatives. Bands performing at Conference football games shall be prohibited from playing from the time the offensive team breaks from the
huddle until the completion of that play. For no-huddle offenses, no band may play from the time the play
clock reaches 15 seconds or the offensive team is prepared to snap the ball (whichever comes first) until the
play is concluded. (12/84, 2/92, 7/19)
(1) Artificial Noisemakers.
Artificial noisemakers are prohibited at all games hosted by Conference members. However, special implements related to and used by the spirit groups of the participating institutions (e.g., UCLA
airhorn) shall be permitted. (2/92, 10/03)
(2) Field Clearance.
Cheerleaders, bands, spirit groups, and mascots are prohibited from coming onto the playing field at
Conference football games while play is in progress, and Conference referees shall not have discretionary authority in this area, as permitted by NCAA football rules. (5/83)
(3) Home Team Student Body and Band.
The home team student body shall not be located inside the 20-yard lines of the visiting team sideline.
The home team band shall not be located any closer to the visiting sideline than the goal posts. (8/13,
5/20)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 125

SPR 6-1-d

Football Regulations

SPR 6-1-e

d. Benches.
The home team bench shall be located on the opposite side of the field from the visiting team bench. (12/72,
8/13)
e. Conference Schedule.
Member institutions shall be aligned into a non-division single ranking 1-12.(10/10, 6/12, 7/22)
Conference competition shall consist of a nine-game schedule on a rotating basis. (10/62, 1/69, 12/76, 5/80,
12/80, 8/85, 12/89, 6/91, 6/92, 6/05, 10/06, 6/08, 10/10, 7/22)
Each team shall play four home games each season, and teams that host the contest against their traditional
rival shall play a fifth home game that season. The site of contests shall be alternated from season-to-season.
[Example sequence: Year 1: A at B, Year 2: B at A.] No team shall play more than two consecutive road
games in a given season and no team shall play three road games and have one bye in a four-week period.
Best efforts shall be made to avoid having an institution play four out of five games on the road. (6/12,
8/13)
Games between traditional rivals will be scheduled for the last weekend of the regular season or, if that
date is unavailable, as late in the season as possible. The California-Stanford game shall not be scheduled
during the week that includes Thanksgiving. (6/12)
Conference games may be scheduled during the first week of the regular season if doing so would prevent
a team from playing 12 consecutive weeks and provide a bye later in the season. (10/12)
A “special date” games is defined as a contest played on a day of the week other than Saturday. A total of
eight special date games shall be scheduled to be televised by FOX and ESPN, but only with the approval of
the Conference. Each institution shall host two special date games during every three year period beginning
in 2012 to be televised by FOX and ESPN. If additional special date games are scheduled to be televised by
the Pac-12 Network, they shall not count toward the FOX/ESPN hosting requirements. Institutions shall be
limited each season to one road weekday football game while classes are in session. (10/11, 6/12)
Teams that play a special date game on a Friday do not require a bye the week prior. However, a Saturday
road game shall not be scheduled the week prior to a special date Friday night road game. Teams that play
a special date game on a Thursday require a bye the week prior, except that if both teams played a home
game the prior Saturday, a bye may not be required, provided the two competing institutions agree. (6/12)
The following facets of the schedule shall affect all members over time: (6/12)
•

Schedule changes that move games between traditional rivals from the last week of the regular season;
and (6/12)

•

Playing a full season of 12 games without a bye. An institution whose schedule includes a 13th regularseason game at Hawaii that replaces a bye is not relieved of this requirement. (6/12)

•

If an institution takes the proactive measure to schedule a non-conference opponent as an off-set for
another non-conference game (e.g., Notre Dame) that is scheduled after the third (13-week season) or
fourth week (14 week season) of the season, that institution would be exempt from having to play 12
games in a row during the term of the ESPN/FOX agreements (through 2023 football season). A waiver
of SPR 6-1-c-(1) (Restricted Weeks) would be required to schedule such a non-conference game. (12/14)

These scheduling parameters may be waived by the Athletics Directors Committee, but only by mutual
consent of the involved institutions. The initial Conference schedule and any changes to it shall be approved by the Athletics Directors Committee. (6/12)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 126

Football Regulations

SPR 6-1-e-(1)

SPR 6-1-e-(3)

(1) Restricted Weeks.
Effective with agreements dated on or after October 7, 2010, non-Conference games may not be scheduled after the third week of any 14-week regular season. For any 15-week regular season an institution
may not schedule a non-Conference game after the fourth week of the season and a Conference game
may be scheduled in place of a bye that occurs during the first three weeks of the season if a nonConference game is scheduled for the fourth week. The Athletics Directors Committee shall have the
authority to waive these requirements. (6/12)
The institutions have agreed to use weeks 10-12 (14-week season) or weeks 11-13 (15-week season) to
play a non-conference game if coordinated through the Conference staff so as not to disrupt the drafting of the overall Conference schedule. This late-season non-conference scheduling during weeks 10-12
(14-week season) or weeks 11-13 (15-week season) would require a second Pac-12 institution (or additional pairs) to also schedule a non-conference game during the same week and would result in those
institutions playing a Conference game during the first three/four weeks of the season. Additionally,
one institution can schedule a non-conference game during the week in October when Stanford/USC
play at Notre Dame. This dynamic scheduling approach is intended to provide Conference members
with an option to better manage the balance of their competitive schedule. Conference members with
an option to better manage the balance of their competitive schedule. (6/12, 7/19)
(2) Non-Conference Home/Neutral Site.
The scheduling of a home or neutral-site non-conference football game within the Pac-12 footprint on
a day other than Saturday, or the move of a home or neutral-site non-conference football game within
the Pac-12 footprint off of a Saturday must be coordinated through the Conference office. (8/14)
The following procedures will be used to consider date-change requests:
(a) All requests must be received by the Conference office by March 15 a year prior to the season.
(b) After March 15, the staff will consult with television partners regarding the proposed changes
and to determine whether all of the requested moves can be accommodated.
(c) By April 15 the Commissioner will determine which game(s) may move to a day(s) other than
Saturday. The Commissioner will consider all relevant factors including contractual obligations,
input from television partners and prior years movement of games to days other than Saturday.
(d) On April 15, the institutions will be notified of the Commissioner’s decision and a public announcement of the date change(s) will be permissible.
(e) Requests to change playing dates after April 15 a year prior to the season will be considered,
but will require approval of the Conference television partners.
(3) Rescheduling Policies.
It shall be the goal of the Conference to play each Conference football game to completion as scheduled. If a game is delayed at the start or interrupted, the referee, after consultation with the two head
coaches and game management, shall determine how much time the teams shall be provided to warm
up prior to the start of play. A game hosted by a Conference institution that goes into overtime and is
subsequently called due to darkness prior to a winner being determined shall be a tie game. When a
game cannot be played to completion, these policies shall be followed: (10/96, 12/96, 2/98)
(a) If the game is suspended during play, every effort should be made by game officials and game
management to continue it as soon as conditions allow, with the safety of student-athletes and
spectators of paramount concern in the decision of when it can be resumed. (10/96)
i. If at all possible, if the game(s) has a bearing on the Conference Championship, the Conference’s representative in the Rose Bowl or College Football Playoff, any member institution’s
2022-23 Handbook • Page 127
Updated 7/1/22

Football Regulations

SPR 6-1-e-(3)

SPR 6-1-f-(2)

eligibility to participate in postseason play or its opportunity to gain the best possible bowl
berth, the game will be resumed at exactly the point of its suspension. (10/96, 10/06, 6/11,
7/22)
ii. If none of the provisions of paragraph i above are applicable, the game will be resumed at
exactly the point of its suspension unless the participating institutions agree not to resume the
contest. (10/96)
(b) If at all possible, a Conference game(s) which is suspended prior to the beginning of play
shall be rescheduled at a subsequent time if it has a bearing on the Conference championship, the
Conference’s representative in the Rose Bowl or College Football Playoff, any member institution’s
eligibility to participate in post-season play or its opportunity to gain the best possible bowl berth.
A suspended football game not meeting any of those criteria also will be rescheduled unless the
competing institutions agree not to reschedule the contest. (7/92, 10/96, 10/06, 6/11, 7/22)
(c) In any situation in which a game has been suspended and is to be resumed, the participating
institutions should attempt to reschedule the game to play it while the visiting institution’s team
still is at the site of the game (assuming it reached the game site prior to suspension) to avoid the
cost and loss of academic time required for it to make a second trip to the game site. (8/84, 7/92,
10/96)
(d) Any additional financial costs or obligations incurred by either institution in connection with
the suspension, rescheduling or cancellation of the suspended contest shall be borne equally by the
two involved institutions. (12/96)
(4) Commissioner’s Rescheduling Oversight.
In the event a contest(s) is cancelled, the athletics directors of the involved institutions shall work under
the oversight of the Commissioner to reschedule the competition(s). If the Directors cannot mutually
agree on a make-up date(s), the Commissioner shall set the terms of the rescheduling. Per AR 3-2 and
SPR 6-1-c, regardless of a determination by the athletics directors or Commissioner, all date changes
of football games between Conference members must be reviewed and approved by the ADC. (6/08)
f.

Credentials.
(1) Team Area Credentials.
Team-area credentials shall be limited to 50 in number (not including medical personnel) for each team.
Starting with the 2021 season, team medical personnel will not count towards the team sideline area
limit. Teams are allowed to have as many medical staff members needed to safety manage competition.
Medical staff members should have a distinguishable credential from those of the 50 team area credentials. (i.e. different color, designated sticker, etc.) NCAA football rules limit team-area credentials
to individuals directly involved in the game. Unauthorized personnel should not be issued team-area
credentials or be allowed in the team area. (5/21)
(2) Outside Team Area Credentials.
The visiting institution will be allowed 15 field-access credentials for use outside of the team area.
These credentials should be limited to mandatory working personnel or accompanied guests of the
institution’s president or athletics director.
No other individuals from either institution (except for media, ambulance, etc.) should be allowed
access to the sidelines during a game. Field-access credentials are not to be shared or exchanged. Fieldaccess credentials shall be delivered to the visiting institution no later than the Tuesday immediately
preceding the game. Home team credential use (except for working personnel) shall be limited to the
home team sideline; visiting team credential use shall be limited to the visiting team sideline. (6/12)
2022-23 Handbook • Page 128

SPR 6-1-f-(3)

Football Regulations

SPR 6-1-h

(3) Pre-Game Credentials
The host institution shall provide a minimum 15 pre-game field-access credentials to the visiting institution no later than the Tuesday immediately preceding the game. (6/12, 7/19)
(4) Credential Age Limit.
No person under the age of 18 shall be credentialed to be allowed on the sidelines, including the team
area, during the game unless performing an assigned game-related task. A child under the age of 18
who is functioning in a game administrative capacity in the team area must be in possession of one of
the team’s 50 team-area credentials. Pre-game and post-game sideline access by persons under the age
of 18 is permissible.
Other than children of athletics department staff members who are functioning in a game administration capacity, prospective student-athletes are not allowed on the playing field (i.e., on the sidelines or
behind the end zone area) while the game is being played or at halftime. (6/06, 10/08)
g. Electronic Video or Message Boards.
The use of electronic boards which present video replays or messages shall be permitted in Conference
football stadiums. The host institution shall be responsible for the content of the displays, and also must
ensure the boards are not used in a fashion that disrupts the game or creates a competitive disadvantage
to either team. (5/66, 9/88, 8/89)
Each institution’s football video board production shall include a minimum of four cameras and the capability to capture and record a minimum of four camera feeds, and have the capability to provide at least
four different camera views to the instant replay booth for review purposes if the game is not being televised. The expense to meet the minimums shall be the responsibility of the institution. (6/07, 10/07)
All noise emanating from a video or message board must stop when the offensive team breaks the huddle.
The person(s) who operates a video or message board is subject to the NCAA football playing rules. NCAA
football rule 9-2-1-b-5 stipulates that no noise shall be created that “prohibits a team from hearing its signals.” This rule shall be enforced by the game officials, who will first instruct game management that the
noise has a negative effect on the game and must be stopped. (2/00, 6/00, 6/08)
Once the referee signals that a play will be reviewed, the home production staff shall project the feed from
the instant replay monitor on all in-stadium screens. If the review involves unsettling content (injuries,
targeting reviews, etc.), the production staff shall use discretion and may opt to use a static image in place
of the replay monitor. The number of replays shown is unlimited provided that the instant replay monitor
feed is the source. No in-house camera replays shall be shown. Once the referee makes a final announcement regarding the outcome of the play in review, no further replays can be shown. (8/15)
If a technical issue occurs with the instant replay monitor feed, the home production staff may project the
television feed (ESPN, FOX, Pac-12 Networks) on all in-stadium screens. The number of replays shown
is unlimited provided that the television feed is the source. No in-house camera replays shall be shown.
However, if television goes to a commercial break during an official review, replays from in-house cameras
may be shown in stadium without limitation, provided that these replays are handled the same for plays
involving either the home or visiting team. (5/66, 9/88, 8/89, 12/14, 8/15)
h. Entrance Requirement.
When both teams refuse to enter the field first for the start of either half, the home team must be the first
to enter. At stadiums in which both teams must utilize the same tunnel for entering and exiting the field,
the teams should remain separated in that tunnel area. The team with its bench closer to the tunnel should
precede the other team upon exiting the field at the conclusion of the first half, and the losing team should
exit the field first at the conclusion of the game. The teams may agree to change the order for exiting the

2022-23 Handbook • Page 129

Football Regulations

SPR 6-1-i

SPR 6-1-k

field at halftime by mutual consent of the event managers of the two involved institutions prior to the start
of the season. (4/78, 6/93, 6/03, 10/03, 6/05, 6/06)
i.

Field-Rushing Policies.
(1) Institutional Security Plan.
Each institution must have a security plan in place to effectively prevent spectators from rushing the
field and/or throwing objects onto the playing surface. (8/15, 8/16)
(2) Failure to Prevent Field-Rushing Activities.
All field rushing incidents are reviewed by the Conference. The Commissioner may (in his or her sole
discretion) impose discipline. In the event field-rushing activities occur within 60 seconds immediately
following the end of a contest, penalties may be applied to include private/public reprimands and/or
institutional fines. Mitigating factors may include if the visiting team, staff members, working personnel, and game officials safely exit from the field during the 60-seconds immediately following the end
of the contest. (8/15, 8/16, 7/22)
Institutional fines will follow an escalating penalty structure:
(a) A fine of $10,000 assessed for an institution’s first financial penalty.
(b) A fine of $25,000 assessed for an institution’s second financial penalty.
(c) A fine of $50,000 assessed for an institution’s third financial penalty.
(d) A fine of $100,000 assessed for an institution’s forth financial penalty. (6/17, 7/22)

j.

Official Football Uniform Approval.

All new football jerseys to be used during the 2016 football season and thereafter must be sent to the Conference office for approval. The approval process will ensure that all jerseys comply with NCAA Playing
Rule 1, which states: (8/15)
(1) The jersey must have clearly visible, permanent Arabic numerals measuring at least 8 and 10 inches
in height front and back, respectively. The number must be of a color that itself is clearly in distinct
contrast with the color of the jersey, irrespective of any border around the number. (8/15)
(2) Teams wearing jerseys/numerals that do not conform to this rule will be asked to change into legal
jerseys before the game and before the start of each quarter until the jerseys are changed. Officials shall
charge a team timeout at the start of each quarter the illegal jerseys are worn. (8/15)
(3) All players of a team shall have the same color and style numbers front and back. The individual
bars must be approximately 1-1/2 inches wide. Numbers on any part of the uniform shall correspond
with the mandatory front and back jersey numbers. (8/15)
The new jersey(s) must be sent to the Conference office for review by November 15 of the year preceding the year in which the jersey is to be worn. (e.g., Team A wishes to wear two new jerseys in 2017, both
of those jerseys must be sent to the Conference office for review no later than November 15, 2016). The
Conference office will then respond with approval, denial or suggested alterations by December 15. Any
subsequent changes made to a jersey(s) due to a denial or suggested alterations must be re-submitted to the
Conference office by January 15. The design of all submitted jerseys shall be kept confidential. (8/15, 2/17)
k. Officiating Policies.
See also AR 6, AR 6-10, and CER 4.

2022-23 Handbook • Page 130
Updated 7/1/22

Football Regulations

SPR 6-1-k-(1)

SPR 6-1-l-(7)

(1) Pool Reporter for Officiating Interpretations.
Upon request from the media for a rules interpretation, a pool reporter will be selected by the home
sports information director of a Conference member for the purpose of obtaining that interpretation
from the chief of the officiating crew. After a ten-minute cooling-off period, the SID will accompany the
pool reporter to the officials’ dressing room. The officials may not be interviewed concerning judgment
calls. The chief official will address only the specific rule interpretation that was requested, and shall
not answer questions about other officiating topics or game situations. (6/88, 7/19)
(2) Support of Officiating.
Support of football officiating is required by the Conference (see CER 4) and bolstered by a specific
program of positive actions outlined in CER 4-5. (6/96)
l.

Playing Rules.

Conference games shall be conducted under the NCAA Football Rules and Interpretations except as modified below. (6/92)
(1) Auxiliary Down Box.
Home team management shall provide an auxiliary down box on the opposite side of the field from the
official chain gang. (4/78)
(2) Bandanas and Headbands.
Bandanas and headbands may not be worn during football games. However, elasticized skull caps may
be worn for safety reasons, provided the cap worn by each player on a team is of the same color, and
that color is the primary color of the player’s institution or black. (6/92, 9/98)
(3) Field Markings.
It is strongly recommended that no permanent lines marking field dimensions in other sports or activities be permitted on Conference football fields. (12/76)
(4) Goals.
Each goal shall consist of two white or yellow uprights extending at least 40 feet above the ground
with a connecting white or yellow horizontal crossbar, the top of which is 10 feet above the ground.
The inside of the uprights and crossbar shall be in the same vertical plane as the inside edge of the end
line. (6/08)
(5) Halftime Length.
The length of halftime for Conference games shall be 20 minutes. (6/06, 10/06)
(6) Instant Replay.
High-definition instant replay shall be used. (6/10)
(7) Jersey Colors.
The home and visiting teams may wear contrasting colored jerseys only in traditional rival games.
(6/09)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 131

Football Regulations

SPR 6-1-l-(8)

SPR 6-1-p

(8) Objects Thrown on Field.
If the referee interrupts a contest to have debris thrown from the stands removed from the playing
field, the public address announcer shall immediately request that spectators refrain from throwing
any additional objects onto the field which might cause the contest to be further interrupted or possibly
injure the players or other game personnel. The signal to the public address announcer to make this
announcement shall be the referee calling an official’s timeout. (9/03)
(9) Suspended Games.
See SPR 6-1-c-(2). (2/98)
(10)Team Area.
The team area for Conference football games shall be between the 20-yard lines. Only players in uniform, injured or non-participating student-athletes wearing their game jerseys, or a person wearing a
team-area credential, including coaches, shall be allowed in the team area. Such team-area credentials
shall be limited to 50 in number for each team (not including medical personnel) for each team. Starting with the 2021 season, team medical personnel will not count towards the team sideline area limit.
Teams are allowed to have as many medical staff members needed to safety manage competition.
Medical staff members should have a distinguishable credential from those of the 50 team area credentials. (i.e., different color, designated sticker, etc.) NCAA football rules limit team-area credentials
to individuals directly involved in the game. Unauthorized personnel should not be issued team-area
credentials or be allowed in the team area. (4/86, 12/88, 6/93, 10/08, 7/22)
m. Pregame Format and Warm-Up.
A pregame countdown sheet shall be provided in each team’s locker room. The use of the playing field shall
be confined to the participating football teams until 20:00 remains on the pregame clock, at which time the
teams will clear the field and the host institution may present its pregame show. The band(s) may not enter
the team areas until the teams have left the playing field. There shall be no waiver of the provisions of this
rule, including mutual agreement between the participating institutions. (11/86, 12/89, 12/91, 12/93, 6/99,
6/05)
A schematic of the team warm-up areas shall be provided in each team’s locker room. Kickers shall be
allowed to kick at both ends of the field until 60 minutes prior to kickoff. At 60 minutes prior to kickoff,
the field shall be divided into an “L-shaped” configuration with the 30-yard lines forming the “L”. At 40
minutes prior to kickoff, the field shall be divided at the 45-yard lines (leaving a 10-yard buffer zone for
the teams between the 45-yard lines) until the teams leave the field after warm-ups. (12/89, 12/91, 6/95)
n. Prospective Student-Athletes.
Other than children of athletics department staff members who are functioning in a game administrative
capacity, prospective student-athletes are not permitted on the playing field area (i.e., on the sidelines or
behind the end zone area) while the game is being played or at halftime. See SPR 6-2-p. (4/86)
o. Security Escorts for Officials.
Uniformed police officers (not non-uniformed security personnel) shall escort football officials on and off
the playing field. These security officers should come from a point on the sideline near the officials, not the
end zone, to provide halftime and post-game security for the officials. (6/00)
p. Sideline Phones.
The home institution is responsible for the maintenance of sideline communication systems. The home
institution must make a minimum of five phone lines available for the visiting team utilizing the configu2022-23 Handbook • Page 132
Updated 7/1/22

Football Regulations

SPR 6-1-p

SPR 6-1-s-(2)

ration requested by the visiting team. The visiting team is free to bring in its own sideline communication equipment. If either sideline communication system fails, both teams will shut down their phones or
walkie talkies. This applies even if the visiting team brought its own equipment. Further, if there is a partial
breakdown that takes the total number of phone lines available to either team to less than five, both teams
will be limited to a like number of lines (e.g., Team A has a partial breakdown that leaves only three phone
lines operational. Team B must shut down all but three lines). (11/90)
The home institution shall provide the visiting team with the name and method of contact of personnel
charged with phone and headset repair at the stadium. (4/86)
q. Squad Limitations.
For Conference games not involving traditional rivals, the visiting team squad limit shall be 74 studentathletes. The home team shall have no squad limit, but only 74 student-athletes may be housed at a hotel
the night before the game. For Conference games involving traditional rivals, both the home team and
the visiting team shall have no squad limit and each may house up to 74 student-athletes at a hotel the
night before the game. The Council may approve waivers to this rule for games which involve unusual
circumstances (e.g., a game played in a foreign country which offers unique educational opportunities for
the traveling student-athletes). [Five-year moratorium (through 2023 football season) on consideration of
future increases to football travel squad.] (12/71, 12/73, 12/74, 8/75, 1/76, 5/77, 5/79, 5/85, 6/04, 8/04,
6/08, 6/10, 7/19)
r.

Starting Time.

The participating institutions of each football game must accept a start time proposed by the carrier of a
Conference television program which is consistent with the terms of its contract with the Conference. (6/88,
6/00, 6/03, 10/08, 7/12)
s. Ticket Policies.
(1) Visitors Ticket Allotment.
For all Pac-12 intra-Conference football games, the home institution shall make an initial allotment of
2,000 contiguous tickets available to the visiting institution. (6/05, 7/12, 11/16)
(2) Returned Tickets.
The majority of the remaining visiting institution’s tickets should be received by the home institution
eight (8) business days prior to the game. When a game is not sold out, 200 tickets may be returned by
the visiting institution four (4) business days prior to the game via overnight delivery, and tickets not to
exceed 80 may be returned to the host institution no later than 1-1/2 hours prior to game time. Within
three business days after receiving written notification of the host institution’s initial sellout*, the visiting institution must return via overnight delivery all remaining tickets. In the case of a sellout, tickets
not to exceed 40 may be returned by the visiting institution to the host institution no later than 1-1/2
hours prior to game time. All other tickets retained by the visiting institution become the financial
responsibility of that institution. The institutions shall coordinate directly on additional visiting team
tickets and processes on a game-by-game basis. (11/16)
*No side-by-side reserved seats available for the public to purchase.
All “killed” tickets for visitor’s rooting section, bands, etc., must be returned no later than 1-1/2 hours
prior to game time. The host institution shall deliver to the visiting institution a preliminary ticket
recap statement showing the tickets used by the visiting institution within 15 business days after the
event. The visiting institution shall be required to confirm the accuracy of this statement within 10 business days of receipt of the statement. (6/63, 5/83, 6/05)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 133

Football Regulations

SPR 6-1-s-(3)

SPR 6-1-t-(3)

(3) Will Call.
No “collect” will call tickets will be accepted from the visiting institution. Will call tickets from the
visiting institution must be presented to the host institution for pickup 1-1/2 hours prior to game time.
At the request of the visiting institution, the host institution shall provide a minimum of one person
to assist with the visiting institution’s will call/player and guest tickets. The visiting institution shall
provide one person to administer its player/guest will call tickets at the event. (5/83, 6/05)
t.

Video Exchange Policies.

All Conference head football coaches have agreed to adopt equitable video exchange policies and to work
to alleviate all exchange problems, and shall not seek to gain an advantage over an opponent through a
“loophole” in the Conference’s video exchange policy. (4/86, 6/89, 6/06)
(1) Off-Season Video Exchange.
All video from the previous season including College Football Playoff Game(s), bowl games, and the
Conference Football Championship Game may be exchanged with a non-Conference opponent. (6/06,
8/15, 7/20)
(2) In-Season Video Exchange.
(a) Each member of the Conference agrees to exchange sideline video and scoreboard/sideline
high definition video (720p) and sideline/end zone intercut high definition video for each contest
(all prior games). Institutions shall not alter the video in any way, including watermarking, color
correcting, cropping, etc. The Conference has adopted an open exchange of video, which means
that all prior games may be secured from the central server by a Conference institution at its discretion once the games have been loaded onto the server. The last video to be exchanged, the most
recently played game video, will be electronically transferred following the game (earliest possible
transfer). All previous games must be uploaded to the central server prior to the institution downloading the final game of its next opponent. (6/93, 10/02, 6/06, 6/11, 8/15, 7/20)
(b) If the preferred method (Catapult Exchange) of electronic transfer of video fails, the institutions shall revert to the following procedures: The high definition video content, in the highest
quality digital format, for all prior games is to be exchanged as soon as possible prior to the scheduled contest using an alternate electronic method of transfer (Box, Dropbox, YouSendIt, etc.) that
the video coordinators agree upon. (6/06, 6/11, 8/15, 7/20)
(c) Conference members will participate in National Open Video Exchange by following all regulations set by the National Open Exchange Co-Op. (6/06, 7/19, 7/20)
(3) Conference Football Championship Game/College Football Playoff Games/Bowl Games.
Conference Football Championship Game, College Football Playoff Games, and bowl games shall be
treated in the same manner as in-season exchange with non-Conference opponents as outlined in SPR
6-2-t-(2)-(c) above. Conference institutions will not send a non-Conference institution a copy of a Conference game unless it is a direct exchange between two institutions meeting in a playoff or bowl game.
Subsequent to completion of the Conference Football Championship Game, the participants will post
their versions of the game in accordance with in-season exchange rules. Institutions that participate in
playoff or bowl games shall post their video no later than January 15. The video from these bowl games
shall be posted to the central server. (4/86, 4/89, 6/89, 6/06, 6/10, 8/15)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 134

Football Regulations

SPR 6-1-t-(4)

SPR 6-2-a-(1)

(4) Video Exchange Rules.
(a) Each host institution shall make available to the visiting institution adequate sideline and end
zone facilities to shoot the game—equal to the host institution’s facilities—without charge to the
visiting institution. (6/89, 2/92, 6/93, 6/06)
(b) Exchange video is to be recorded on the highest quality media format available. The content
must be separated into offense, defense, and kicking game. The intercut video be broken down into
offense, defense and kicking game. Kicking game video shall will be further broken down into the
following phases: kickoff, kickoff return, punt, punt return, PAT/FG, PAT/FG block. (4/86, 6/89,
11/90, 6/93, 6/06, 6/11, 8/15)
(c) A play-by-play document including full, final statistics of each game; flip cards and programs;
and updated statistics shall be made available electronically by each institution’s SID. (6/89, 6/06,
8/15, 7/19)
(d) The exchange format will be 720p. (7/19)
(e) All exchange video shall be in color. (6/89, 6/06)
(f) Preceding each play on sideline video, a full three-second shot of the scoreboard showing as accurate as possible, distance, field position, and game clock must be taken. (6/89, 6/93, 6/06, 8/15)
(g) The recording of all plays should begin when the quarterback approaches the line of scrimmage and shall include all pre-snap shifts and motions. (6/93, 6/06, 8/15)
(h) All institutions shall be notified of any missed play on all exchanged content. Every effort
should be made to correct error(s), a corrected file shall be posted as soon as possible, and all institutions shall be notified. (6/93, 6/06, 8/15)
(i) Every effort should be made by the video coordinators (VCs) to shoot all acts of fighting within
their view. Framing of the shot(s) will be dictated by the act(s) with the VCs using appropriate
judgment. Both teams will be asked to submit all applicable, unedited footage to the Conference
office for review. Fighting and celebrations should not be included on exchange video. (6/93, 6/94,
6/06, 8/15)
(j) Video posted to the central server for the Conference office shall be scoreboard/sideline/end
zone intercut and in continuity game sequence, and posted as soon as possible. (6/89, 8/89, 6/94,
6/00, 6/06, 8/15)
(k) All Pac-12 VC’s agree to deliver, exclusively via Catapult Exchange, all 22 coaches’ video
(O/D/K reels) to the College Football Playoff Committee for all home hosted games and any neutral site games they are deemed the home team. The expectation is that delivery shall occur as soon
as possible following the game or return to campus (7/19, 7/20)
2. Championship Game Policies.
a. Championship Determination.
The Conference champion shall be the winner of the Conference Football Championship Game, played between the two Pac-12 teams with the highest Conference winning percentage. (10/62, 12/76, 5/80, 12/80,
8/85, 12/89, 6/91, 6/08, 10/10, 7/22)
(1) Site.
The Conference Football Championship Game shall be played at Allegiant Stadium in Las Vegas, Nevada. (10/10, 6/11, 8/14, 7/20)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 135
Updated 7/1/22

Football Regulations

SPR 6-2-a-2

SPR 6-2-b-(1)

(2) Determination of Home Team.
The home team in the Pac-12 Championship Game will be the team with the highest conference winning percentage. In the event of a tie, refer to the Pac-12 Football Championship Tiebreaker procedure
[SPR 6-2-b-(1) and (2)]. (8/14, 11/16, 7/22)
(3) Reschedulng Policies for Football Championship Game.
In the event an act of God or other occurrence beyond the control of the Conference adversely impacts
the scheduled start time or date of the Conference Football Championship Game, the Commissioner,
after consultation with appropriate authorities, business partners, and university officials, will determine the appropriate steps necessary to play, delay or postpone the game. Should the Commissioner
determine that postponement is warranted, the game will be rescheduled to be played as soon as possible and preferably within the same weekend. In the event that the Allegiant Stadium is deemed to
be unusable or unsafe or other forces make the playing of the game at Allegiant Stadium impractical,
consideration will be given to moving to a game site in proximity to Allegiant Stadium to be played at
the previously scheduled time/date or as soon as reasonably possible thereafter. The Commissioner,
in consultation with the Chair of the Pac-12 Board of Directors, has ultimate authority to determine the
time/date and site of the Championship Game under these circumstances. (10/11, 8/14, 7/20)
[Additional Championship Game policies may be found in the Conference Championship Game Handbook.]
b. Tiebreaker.
(1) Two-Team Tie.
(a) If two teams are tied for first place both teams will participate in the championship game and
the winner of the head-to-head will be the #1 seed. If there is not a tie for first place, but two teams
are tied for second place, the two-team tiebreaker policy will apply and the winner will be the #2
seed and visiting team. (7/22)
(b) Win percentage against the next highest placed common opponent in the standings (based on
record in all games played within the Conference), proceeding through the standings. a. When
arriving at another group of tied teams while comparing records, use each team’s win percentage
against the collective tied teams as a group (prior to that group’s own tie-breaking procedure)
rather than the performance against individual tied teams. (8/14, 7/22)
(c) Win percentage against all common conference opponents. (7/22)
(d) Combined win percentage in conference games of conference opponents (i.e., strength of conference schedule). (7/22)
(e) Total number of wins in a 12-game season. The following conditions will apply to the calculation of the total number of wins:
(i) Only one win against a team from the NCAA Football Championship Subdivision or
lower division will be counted annually. (7/22)
Any games that are exempted from counting against the annual maximum number of football contests per NCAA rules (NCAA 17.10.5.2.1) shall not be included. (8/14, 7/22)
(f) Highest ranking by SportSource Analytics (team Rating Score metric) following the last weekend of regular-season games. (8/14, 7/22)
(g) Coin Toss. (7/22)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 136
Updated 7/1/22

Football Regulations

SPR 6-2-b-(2)

SPR 6-3

(2) Multiple Team Tie.
In the event of a tie between more than two teams, the following procedures will be used. After one
team has an advantage and is “seeded,” all remaining teams in the multiple-team tie-breaker will repeat the multiple-team tie-breaking procedure. If at any point the multiple-team tie is reduced to two
teams, the two-team tie-breaking procedure will be applied. (6/11, 8/14, 11/16, 7/22)
(a) Head-to-head (best cumulative win percentage in games among the tied teams). If not every
tied team has played each other, go to step b. (8/14, 7/22)
(b) Win percentage against all common conference opponents (must be common among all teams
involved in the tie). (8/14, 7/22)
(c) Record against the next highest placed common opponent in the standings (based on record in
all games played within the conference), proceeding through the standings. (8/14, 7/22)
(i) When arriving at another group of tied teams while comparing records, use each
team’s win percentage against the collective tied teams as a group (prior to that group’s
own tie-breaking procedure) rather than the performance against individual tied teams.
(7/22)
(d) Combined win percentage in conference games of conference opponents (i.e., strength of conference schedule). (8/14, 7/22)
(e) Highest ranking by SportSource Analytics (team Rating Score metric) following the last weekend of regular-season games. (8/14, 11/16, 7/22)
(f) Coin toss (8/14, 11/16, 7/22)
3. Postseason Bowl Games.
Conference football teams shall be selected to participate in postseason bowl games in the following sequential
order:
(1) The Conference champion (per SPR 6-1-a) shall represent the Conference in the Rose Bowl in those
years in which the Conference champion is not rated No. 1, 2, 3 or 4 in the College Football Playoff
(CFP) final regular season rankings. In addition, as presented in SPR 6-1-e-(3), if every team does not
play nine Conference games, the winning percentage in all regular-season Conference games played
also shall be used to determine the subsequent positions in the standings of the other teams to determine bowl positions. (6/98, 6/06, 6/08, 3/12, 8/14)
(2) At its option, the CFP may select another team to participate in one of its games. (12/94, 6/08,
8/14)
(3) After the Rose Bowl and/or CFP participants from the Conference have been identified, the Conference has bowl agreements with six additional bowl games which have selection preference in the following order: Alamo Bowl, Holiday Bowl, Sun Bowl, LA Bowl, San Francisco Bowl, ESPN Pool Bowls
(2021-22): Gasparilla Bowl, First Responders Bowl, Armed Forces Bowl, Independence Bowl. Team
selection criteria for each bowl game is outlined in the agreement between the Pac-12 and the bowl.
(12/94, 12/95, 5/97, 9/98, 6/06, 6/10, 11/10, 6/11, 3/12, 8/14, 8/21)
(4) A Conference football team must have six regular-season wins, including a limit of one against an
NCAA Football Championship Subdivision (FCS) team, in order to participate in a post-season bowl
game. [A team that plays 13 regular-season games (e.g., game at Hawaii) and has a 6-7 record would be
bowl eligible.] (6/18)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 137
Updated 7/1/22

SPR 6-4
4.

Football Regulations

SPR 6-5-a

Practice Policies.

Proper football technique and mechanics, especially when blocking and tackling are involved, should be the
priority at every football practice. The core, upper body and lower body should be utilized for contact and
players should be taught to avoid using the helmet to initiate contact. Players initiating contact should neither
utilize their helmet in play-making, nor target the recipient of a block or tackle above the shoulders.
a. NCAA Rules.
Except where expressly limited below, Pac-12 institutions shall continue to abide by the football practice
rules and regulations outlined in the annual NCAA Division I Manual.
b. Definition of “Full Contact”.
The Pac-12 shall define “full contact” as any live tackling, live tackling drills, scrimmages or other activities
where players are generally taken to the ground. Full contact shall not include “thud” sessions or drills that
involve “wrapping up” where players are not taken to the ground and contact is not aggressive in nature.
c. Fall/In-Season Practices.
Pac-12 institutions shall limit full contact practices to two (2) per week during the regular football season
[the period between the first regular-season game and the last regular-season game or Pac-12 Championship Game (for participating institutions)].
d. Preseason Practices.
For days during which Pac-12 institutions schedule a two-a-day practice, full contact shall be allowed in
one practice (the other practice is limited to helmets and shoulder pads). If full contact practices are scheduled consecutively around one of the two-a-day full contact practices, only one of those practices shall be
more than 50 percent full contact. (e.g., if a morning session of a two-a- day practice is full contact, that
morning session practice or the preceding one-a-day practice would be limited to no more than 50 percent
full contact.
e. Spring Practices.
Pac-12 institutions shall schedule spring practices so that of the eight (8) permissible full contact practices,
only two (2) of those full contact practices occur in a given week. (NCAA rules define these eight practices
as practices involving “tackling.”) This rule will be subject to instances where inclement weather or other
unforeseen circumstances have constricted or otherwise altered a previously finalized spring schedule that
complied with this rule.
5. Awards.
The Conference football coaches shall select recipients for all Conference awards. Coaches shall submit nominations from their team for all-conference consideration Monday prior to the conclusion of the regular season.
The list of nominations and ballot will be provided to the coaches after the conclusion of the regular season. The
voting procedure for all awards shall be based on a weighted ranking. Coaches may not vote for themselves or
for their own players for any of the awards. All Conference voting shall take place the Monday after the Pac-12
Football Championship Game (by Noon Pacific Time). (6/92, 8/14, 6/17, 12/17)
a. All-Conference Team.
The all-Conference first and second teams shall consist of 11 offensive players, 11 defensive players, a
punter, a kicker, a return specialist, and a special teams player. First-team honorees shall be provided an
award from the Conference. Second-team honorees shall be provided a certificate by the Conference office.
Players who are not selected all-conference, but received at least two votes, shall be accorded honorable
2022-23 Handbook • Page 138

Football Regulations

SPR 6-5-a

SPR 6-8

mention. After the selection process, the Conference office shall provide the all-conference team to the
coaches. Coaches may then add up to two individuals from his team for honorable mention and inclusion
in a Conference media release. (6/92, 2/99, 6/99, 8/14)
b. Individual Awards.
Individual awards from the Conference office shall be provided to the Coach of the Year, the Offensive
Player of the Year, the Pat Tillman Defensive Player of the Year, and the Freshman/Newcomer of the Year
(offensive and defensive) in the Conference. Balloting conducted for individual awards shall use a weighted voting method. (6/92, 2/99, 6/04, 6/11)
6. Coaches’ Meetings.
There shall be two meetings of the Conference football coaches, one in-person and one via telephone conference
call, with the time and site to be established by the Conference office. Attendance by the head coach is mandatory. (12/85, 6/92, 6/95)
7. Additional Football Policies.
Conference football coaching staffs shall abide by the following rules which may be more stringent than those
contained in the NCAA Manual.
a. Camps and Clinics.
An institution’s camp or clinic shall be confined to its own campus. Coaches may participate on an individual basis in off-campus football camps or clinics involving prospective student-athletes. (5/88, 12/92,
6/95, 5/97, 8/14)
b. Policies for Professional Football Scouts.
(1) Senior Evaluations/Workouts.
If it is requested that a student-athlete from a different Pac-12 institution be permitted to participate in
another Pac-12 institution’s pro day, permission must be provided by that student-athlete’s head coach
to participate in the event. (12/90, 12/91, 6/93, 6/94, 6/03, 8/14)
(2) Contests.
It shall be institutional policy whether scouts for professional football teams may be provided complimentary admission to games and access to press box facilities. Scouts and player personnel employees
for professional football teams shall not be allowed on the sidelines during the conduct of all football
games hosted by Conference members. (12/90, 12/95, 2/98, 6/99, 10/07, 11/07)
8. Spring Football Scheduling Policies.
Dates and venues for spring football games must be submitted no later than November 15 (allows Pac-12 Networks spring television schedules for all sports to be finalized by mid-December). (8/16)
In the event two traditional rival institutions desire the same date and overlapping time for their spring games,
the two institutions will be required to adjust their start times to accommodate clean two-hour telecast windows for both games. (8/16)
Subsequent to November 15 and only in the event of extenuating circumstances, an institution that wishes to
move its spring football date or time must notify the Pac-12 Conference/Networks to find a replacement date
and/or time. (8/16)

