Football Tie-Breaking Procedures
TIE-BREAKING PROCEDURES
Format
The Sun Belt will conducts a divisional play format with two seven-team divisions. The two divisions are:
East Division:
App State
Coastal Carolina
Georgia Southern
Georgia State
James Madison
Marshall
Old Dominion
West Division:
Arkansas State
Louisiana
South Alabama
Southern Miss
Texas State
Troy
The Sun Belt Conference Football Champion will be decided by a game played between the east and west division champions. A division champion shall be the team with the highest winning percentage in all conference games both divisional and non-divisional. A tie football game shall count as half-a-game won and half-a-game lost in the standings. The following tie-breaker formula will be used to break all ties within the division:
TWO TEAM TIE FOR THE DIVISION CHAMPIONSHIP:
1. Head-to-head result between tied teams.
2. If still tied, the team with the highest overall divisional winning percentage shall be the division champion.
3. If still tied, each team's winning percentage vs the team occupying the next highest position in the final divisional standings, and then continuing down through the standings until one team prevails. When arriving at another group of tied teams while comparing records, use each team's record against the collective tied teams as a group, rather than the performance against individual tied teams.
4. If still tied, combined highest winning percentage against all common non- divisional Conference opponents;
5. If still tied, if one team was ranked in the latest available CFP Selection Committee rankings and wins in the final weekend of the Conference regular season, it will be declared the division champion. If in that same scenario, the team that was the highest ranked team in the latest available CFP Selection Committee rankings loses in the final weekend of the Conference regular season, a composite average of selected computer rankings (Anderson & Hester, Massey, Colley and Wolfe) that include all games on the final weekend will be used to determine the division champion.
6. If there are multiple teams ranked in the latest available CFP Selection Committee rankings, if the highest-ranked team wins in the final weekend of the Conference regular season, they will be declared the division champion. If the highest ranked team loses, a composite average of selected computer rankings (Anderson & Hester, Massey, Colley and Wolfe) that include all games on the final weekend will be usedto determine the division champion.
7. If none of the ranked teams win on the final weekend of the Conference regular season, a composite average of selected computer rankings (Anderson & Hester, Massey, Colley and Wolfe) that include all games on the final weekend of the Conference regular season, will be used to determine the division champion.
8. If no teams are ranked in the latest available CFP Selection Committee rankings going into the final weekend of the Conference regular season, a composite average of selected computer rankings (Anderson & Hester, Massey, Colley and Wolfe) that include all games on the final weekend of the Conference regular season, will be used to determine the division champion;
9. If still tied, the team with the highest overall (Conference and non-Conference) winning percentage against FBS teams shall be the division champion;
10. If still tied, coin toss will be conducted by the Commissioner.
MULTIPLE TEAM TIE FOR THE DIVISION CHAMPIONSHIP:
If three or more teams are tied atop a division at the end of the season, the following criteria are used, until one team remains and declared the representative of the Championship game.
1. The team with the highest winning percentage in games played among the tied teams shall be declared the division champion;
2. If still tied, the team with the highest overall divisional winning percentage shall be thedivision champion.
3. If still tied, each team's winning percentage vs the team occupying the next highest position in the final divisional standings, and then continuing down through the standings until one team prevails. When arriving at another group of tied teams while comparing records, use each team's record against the collective tied teams as a group,rather than the performance against individual tied teams. If still tied, combined highest winning percentage against all common non-divisional Conference opponents.
4. If still tied, if one team was ranked in the latest available CFP Selection Committee rankings and wins in the final weekend of the Conference regular season, it will be declared the division champion. If in that same scenario, the team that was the highest ranked team in the latest available CFP Selection Committee rankings loses in the final weekend of the Conference regular season, a composite average of selected computer rankings (Anderson & Hester, Massey, Colley and Wolfe) that include all games on the final weekend will be used to determine the division champion.
5. If there are multiple teams ranked in the latest available CFP Selection Committee rankings, if the highest-ranked team wins in the final weekend of the Conference regular season, they will be declared the division champion. If the highest ranked team loses, a composite average of selected computer rankings (Anderson & Hester, Massey, Colley and Wolfe) that include all games on the final weekend will be used to determine the division champion.
6. If none of the ranked teams win on the final weekend of the Conference regular season, a composite average of selected computer rankings (Anderson & Hester, Massey, Colley and Wolfe) that include all games on the final weekend of the Conference regular season, will be used to determine the division champion;
7. If no teams are ranked in the latest available CFP Selection Committee rankings going into the final weekend of the Conference regular season, a composite average of selected computer rankings (Anderson & Hester, Massey, Colley and Wolfe) that include all games on the final weekend of the Conference regular season, will be used to determine the division champion;
8. If still tied, the team with the highest overall (Conference and non-Conference) winning percentage against FBS teams shall be the division champion;
9. If still tied, the division champion will be determined by lot, conducted by the Commissioner. For all ties of three or more teams, the progression of the tiebreaker shall be followed until the champion amongst the tied is determined. If one team falls out of contention for the highest seed, the remaining teams will continue down the tiebreaker until the champion is determined.
INELIGIBLE DIVISION CHAMPION:
If one or both of the Sun Belt division champions are ineligible to play in the Sun Belt Conference Championship Game, then the divisional team with the next highest winning percentage in all conference games both divisional and nondivisional shall participate. If there is a tie for the next best overall divisional record the following tiebreaking procedure shall be used:
1. If the ineligible team is tied for the division championship, then the team it tied with shall be the Sun Belt Conference Championship Game representative.
2. If two or more teams are tied with an ineligible team for the division championship, then the ineligible team is removed and the remaining teams revert to the tie-break procedure.
3. If there is a division runner-up tie, then the tied teams shall revert to the tiebreak procedure
The Championship Game shall be played at the home venue of the Division Champion with highest winning percentage in Conference games only.
HOST TIE BREAKER:
The following tie-breaker procedure is used to determine the host location for the Sun Belt Conference Football Championship game:
1. Head-to-head result between tied teams;
2. If still tied, if ONE team was ranked in the latest available CFP Selection Committee rankings and wins in the final weekend of the Conference regular season, it will be declared the host. If in that same scenario, the team that was the highest-ranked team in the latest available CFP Selection Committee rankings loses in the final weekend of the Conference regular season, a composite average of selected computer rankings (Anderson & Hester, Massey, Colley and Wolfe) will be used to determine the host.
3. If there are MULTIPLE teams ranked in the latest available CFP Selection Committee rankings, the highest-ranked team that wins in the final weekend of the Conference regular season will be declared the host. If the highest ranked team loses, a composite average of selected computer rankings (Anderson & Hester, Massey, Colley and Wolfe) that include all games on the final weekend will be used to determine the division champion.
4. If none of the ranked teams win on the final weekend of the Conference regular season, a composite average of selected computer rankings (Anderson & Hester, Massey, Colley and Wolfe) that include all games on the final weekend of the Conference regular season, will be used to determine the host;
5. If NO teams are ranked in the latest available CFP Selection Committee rankings going into the final weekend of the Conference regular season, a composite average of selected computer rankings (Anderson & Hester, Massey, Colley and Wolfe) that include all games on the final weekend of the Conference regular season, will be used to determine the host;
6. If still tied, the team with the highest winning percentage against all common Conference opponents shall be the host;
7. If still tied, the team with the highest overall (Conference and non-Conference) winning percentage against FBS teams shall be the host;
8. If still tied, coin toss will be conducted by the Commissioner
If at any time during this analysis, any team(s) should gain an advantage over the other team(s) tied at that position, the team(s) holding the advantage shall move forward in the tiebreaking process while the other team(s) are eliminated. If it is reduced to a two-team tie at any point, the process shall then revert to the beginning of the tiebreaking procedures (tie between two teams) and shall be applied (in order) until the two-team tie is broken.
