Beginning with the 2024 football season with 16 teams, the Big 12 Conference football
schedule does not include a full round-robin play rotation. The goal for determining the
participants is to seed the two teams with the best Conference winning percentage. The
winner of the Big 12 Football Championship Game will represent the conference as the
Automatic Qualiﬁer (AQ) to the College Football Playoﬀ.
When two or more teams are tied for ﬁrst or second place the tiebreaking procedures
apply.
BIG 12 FOOTBALL TIEBREAKING PROCEDURES
Two-Team Tie
If two teams are tied for ﬁrst place both teams will participate in the championship game
and the winner of the game between the two teams shall be the #1 seed. If the two teams
tied for the No. 1 position did not play, the two-team tiebreaking procedures shall apply to
determine the ﬁrst-place team
If there is not a tie for ﬁrst place, but two teams are tied for second place, the two-team
tiebreaker policy will apply, and the winner will be the #2 seed.
a. Head-to-head competition among the two tied teams.
b. Win percentage against all common conference opponents among the tied
teams.
c. Win percentage against the next highest placed common opponent in the
standings (based on the record in all games played within the Conference),
proceeding through the standings. When arriving at another group of tied
teams while comparing records, use each team’s win percentage against the
collective tied teams as a group (prior to that group’s own tie-breaking
procedure) rather than the performance against individual tied teams.
d. Combined win percentage in conference games of conference opponents (i.e.,
the strength of conference schedule).
e. Total number of wins in a 12-game season. The following conditions will apply
to the calculation of the total number of wins: Only one win against a team from
the NCAA Football Championship Subdivision or lower division will be counted
annually. Any games that are exempted from counting against the annual
maximum number of football contests per NCAA rules. (Current Bylaw
17.10.5.2.1) shall not be included.
f.

Highest ranking by SportSource Analytics (team Rating Score metric) following
the last weekend of regular-season games.

g. Coin toss

Multiple-Team Ties
In the event of a tie between more than two teams, the following procedures will be used.
After one team has an advantage and is “seeded”, all remaining teams in the multipleteam tiebreaker will repeat the tie-breaking procedure. If at any point the multiple-team tie
is reduced to two teams, the two-team tie-breaking procedure will be applied.
a. The records of the three (or more) tied teams will be compared based on
winning percentage in games among the tied teams:
1. If all teams involved in the tie did not play each other, but one team
defeated all other teams involved in the tie, the team that defeated all
other teams in the tie is removed from the tiebreaker, and the remaining
teams revert to the beginning of the applicable tiebreaker process (i.e.,
two team or three or more team tie).
2. If all teams involved in the tie did not play each other and no team
defeated all other teams involved in the tie, move to the next step in
tiebreaker.
b. The records of the three (or more) tied teams will be compared based on
winning percentage against all common conference opponents played by all
other teams involved in the tie.
c. Record of the three (or more) tied teams against the next highest placed
common opponent in the standings (based on the record in all games played
within the conference), proceeding through the standings. When arriving at
another group of tied teams while comparing records, use each team’s win
percentage against the collective tied teams as a group (prior to that group’s
own tie-breaking procedure) rather than the performance against individual tied
teams.
d. Record of the three (or more) tied teams based on combined win percentage in
conference games of conference opponents (i.e., strength of conference
schedule)
e. Total number of wins in a 12-game season. The following conditions will apply
to the calculation of the total number of wins: Only one win against a team from
the NCAA Football Championship Subdivision or lower division will be counted
annually. Any games that are exempted from counting against the annual
maximum number of football contests per NCAA rules. (Current Bylaw
17.10.5.2.1) shall not be included.
f.

Highest ranking by SportSource Analytics (team Rating Score metric) following
the last weekend of regular-season games.

g. Coin toss
