2. Conference Football Championship Game.
The Conference shall retain all revenues generated by the Conference Football Championship Game and related activities and shall distribute all net revenues equally among the member institutions after payment of
game-related expenses. (6/11)
3. Conference Bowl Transportation Allowance and Expense Budgets.
The Conference shall retain all revenue generated through bowl games, provide transportation allowance and
expense budget for each Conference participant in a bowl game, and distribute the remaining revenue equally
among the members. (7/19)
#Transportation Allowance

#Expense Budget

Rose Bowl, CFP National,
0-500 miles=$782/mile
Championship Game,
500-1000 miles=$417/mile
Semi-finals, all other CFP games 1000+ miles=$156/mile

$1,876,140

Alamo, Holiday,
San Francisco/Redbox Bowls

0-500 miles=$782/mile
500-1000 miles=$417/mile
1000+ miles=$156/mile

$1,289,325

Sun and Las Vegas Bowls

0-500 miles=$782/mile
500-1000 miles=$417/mile
1000+ miles=$156/mile

$1,042,300

Phoenix Cheez-It Bowl

0-500 miles=$782/mile
500-1000 miles=$417/mile
1000+ miles=$156/mile

$1,000,000

(6/92, 6/93, 6/94, 6/95, 12/95, 6/96, 6/98, 2/99, 6/01, 6/02, 7/03, 6/06, 6/09, 10/11, 12/13, 8/14, 12/14,
6/18, 12/18, 7/19)
#—The transportation allowance and expense budget shall be increased annually (e.g., 2019 bowl reimbursement would be adjusted by CPI change between December 2018 to December 2019) by the National
Bureau of Labor Statistics Consumer Price Index (CPI), not to exceed five percent annually. (6/02, 10/10)
In no case shall the total expense (transportation allowance plus expense budget) exceed the actual game payout for any bowl. The staff may work with the chair of the Bowl Committee to annually consider one-time exceptions to the transportation allowance and/or expense budget. (6/92, 12/92, 6/93, 6/94, 2/98, 2/99, 10/12,
8/14, 1/19)
(See AR 5-4-a for more information about the Rose Bowl expense budget.)
a. Bowl Lobbying Policy.
A Conference institution may not attempt to outbid fellow Conference member institutions for potential
bowl slots by offering financial bonuses, ticket guarantees, or other incentives to bowl officials. (7/19)
2022-23 Handbook • Page 22

Financial Distribution

ER 1-3-b

ER 1-4-a

b. Conference Bowl Ticket Subsidy.
The Conference will subsidize the net number of unsold tickets up to a maximum 50 percent of the Conference-contracted ticket commitments except for the Rose Bowl, CFP Championship Game, or CFP Semifinal game hosted at the Rose Bowl. The staff may work with the chair of the Bowl Committee to annually
consider one-time exceptions to the bowl ticket subsidy. (2/99, 6/01, 6/02, 6/03, 6/06, 10/10, 6/11, 12/14,
6/17, 7/19)
The Conference’s ticket subsidy pool is to be solely funded from the net bowl revenues of the same bowl
games after the participating teams’ transportation allowance and expense budgets have been deducted.
(2/99)
The maximum net number of unsold tickets eligible for reimbursement to a participating Conference institution is calculated as: Contracted ticket guarantee (number of bowl game tickets guaranteed per Conference agreement) less the actual number of game tickets sold by the participating institution, less the number of complimentary game tickets issued by the participating institution for its travel party (staff, coaches,
student-athletes and all others). (6/05)
The maximum ticket subsidy amount is the net number of unsold tickets multiplied by the weighted average price per ticket of the contracted ticket guarantee (as determined in the Conference’s agreement with
the bowl game). The net number of unsold tickets for reimbursement cannot exceed more than one-half of
the Conference-contracted number of game tickets. (6/05)
For all Conference-contracted bowl games, any number of game tickets assumed by the participating institution over and above the Conference-contracted number of tickets must be requested and purchased
subsequent to team selection and is the sole financial responsibility of said institution. (6/05, 7/19)
If the aggregate amount of net bowl revenues (from the bowl games eligible for subsidy) exceeds the aggregate amount of unsold ticket expense in the subsidy formula, the unsold ticket expense will be reimbursed
to participating institutions and any residual net bowl revenue will be distributed equally to member institutions. (2/99, 6/05)
If the aggregate amount of unsold ticket expense exceeds the aggregate net bowl revenue, the unsold ticket
expense deficit will be absorbed as an additional expense in the participating institutions’ bowl expense
budgets. (2/99)
Allocation of the unsold ticket expense deficit will be determined by each participating team’s percentage
of unsold tickets in dollars compared to the total dollar amount of unsold tickets from bowl games in the
subsidy formula. (2/99)
c. Subsidy of College Football Playoff Non-Championship Game Participation
The Athletics Directors Committee may authorize the expenditure of income from a non-Championship
College Football Playoff (CFP) game for expenses for that bowl game in addition to the participating institution’s expense budget as determined by ER 1-3. If time demands make it necessary, the Chair of the
Committee and the Commissioner may commit to such expenditures, which shall be reported to the ADC
in a timely manner. (11/03, 8/14)
4. NCAA Championships Income.
Revenue received from the distribution of net receipts from NCAA Championships, primarily derived from the
Division I Men’s Basketball Championship, shall be distributed in the following manner: (12/90)
a. Broad-Based Pool.
Funds from the broad-based pool shall be distributed directly from the NCAA to the Conference’s member
institutions based upon NCAA formulae recognizing program breadth and award of financial aid. (12/90)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 23

Financial Distribution

ER 1-4-b

ER 1-4-f

b. Basketball Pool.
Funds from the basketball pool shall be distributed by the Conference office equally to the Conference’s
member institutions after permissible expenses per the Conference’s financial reimbursement formulae
(see ER 1-5-a and Appendix C) are paid. (12/90)
c. Academic Enhancement Funds.
Funds designated for academic enhancement shall be distributed by the Conference to each Conference
member institution’s department of athletics. (12/90; 7/20)
d. Special Assistance Fund for Student-Athletes.
The Special Assistance Fund for Student-Athletes shall be distributed to Conference members based upon
a formula which considers the number of student-athletes eligible for Pell Grants (70 percent), the number
of sports sponsored (15 percent), and the number of athletics grants-in-aid (15 percent) at each institution
and dispersed by the Conference office to each Conference member institution’s department of athletics.
Each institution shall determine how to administer the fund on its campus and is not obligated to award
its entire fund each year. Each institution shall be required to file an annual report with the Conference office on the expenditures from its fund. Monies from the Special Assistance Fund for Student-Athletes may
be awarded by the institution to student-athletes under the guidelines of the Student-Athlete Opportunity
Fund. (6/91, 8/92, 12/93, 3/94, 8/95, 5/96, 6/96, 4/97, 10/97, 10/00, 7/01, 6/05, 10/08)
e. Student-Athlete Opportunity Fund.
(1) Distribution Formula.
The Student-Athlete Opportunity Fund shall be divided to provide each Conference institution with an
amount based upon each institution’s number of grants-in-aid. (6/03, 6/06)
(2) Principles for Distribution.
Conference members shall distribute monies from the Student-Athlete Opportunity Fund in accordance with the principles of CB 3-1-g, which requires institutions to cooperate in the spirit of mutual
trust and confidence. (6/03)
The funds should be used to enhance the welfare of enrolled student-athletes and make the studentathlete experience more enjoyable and rewarding. Expenditures should be reasonable. (6/03)
Although it is intended that each institution have maximum flexibility in distributing the funds, and
prohibited uses are minimal, members should avoid any use which might be construed as an attempt
to create a recruiting advantage. Each year, a detailed report on each institution’s expenditures will be
exchanged with the other members of the Conference and other I-A conferences. (6/03)
[Implicit in these principles is the understanding that if an institution did not abide by the principles,
its actions would not be processed through the Conference’s compliance and enforcement procedures
as a violation of Conference rules.] (6/03)
f.

NCAA Values-Based Revenue.

Annual revenue received from the distribution of NCAA Academics-Based funds shall be distributed
equally among member institutions and distributed by the Conference office to each Conference member
institution’s department of athletics. Each institution shall be required to file an annual report with the
Conference office on the expenditures from its fund. Funds must be allocated only for academically-related
expenses, or for other student support programs. Fund allocations shall be approved prior to distribution
by the institution’s faculty athletics representative (6/18)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 24

Financial Distribution

ER 1-5

ER 1-8

5. Basketball Postseason Income.
a. NCAA Tournament.
A member institution which participates in the NCAA Men’s or Women’s Basketball Championship shall
submit detailed expenses on the Conference’s approved budget form to receive reimbursement for those
specified expenses not covered by its NCAA reimbursement. The applicable expense form is contained in
Appendix C. The participating institution may retain all expense monies provided by the NCAA. (3/83,
12/84, 8/85, 6/88, 12/90, 6/93)
b. National Invitation Tournament.
All revenue derived from the National Invitation Tournament postseason basketball tournament shall be
retained by the participating institution. (5/79, 12/79, 8/85, 6/89, 8/10)
c. Conference Tournaments.
Gross revenues, minus expenses as approved by the appropriate Administrative Committee, with final
approval by the Athletics Directors Committee, from the Conference women’s and men’s basketball tournaments shall be distributed by the Conference office equally to the Conference’s member institutions.
(10/01)
6. Purchased Tickets.
The host institution shall make tickets available for purchase by the visiting Conference institution in football
and men’s basketball. All such tickets shall be purchased at full face value. (6/86, 11/03)
a. Men’s Basketball.
For men’s basketball games, a minimum of 100 tickets, 24 of which must be for seats directly behind the
visiting team’s bench and shall be made available at no cost to the visiting institution. The remaining 76,
which shall be made available for purchase by the visiting institution, must be in a group. If those tickets
are not purchased by the visiting institution at least 48 hours prior to the game, they may be released for
sale by the host institution. For a men’s and women’s basketball doubleheader, the 100-ticket allotment
will be shared by the men’s and women’s teams. For doubleheaders, the host institution also shall provide
a special section (a maximum of 22 seats) for the visiting team when it is not playing. (6/86, 6/95, 6/99,
10/03, 11/10, 10/12, 12/19)
7. Visiting Team Complimentary Ticket Policies.
No complimentary tickets shall be available to the visiting institution in football and men’s basketball. For
women’s basketball, a minimum of 60 tickets shall be available for the visiting team at no cost. Twenty-four (24)
of the tickets must be for seats directly behind the visiting team’s bench, with the remaining 36 in a group. The
60 tickets shall be distributed via a pass list at the event. If available, any tickets issued to the visiting institution
above the 60 shall be billed at full face value. (12/14)
For all regular-season Conference sporting events other than football, basketball, and track and field, a maximum of 50 tickets shall be available for the visiting team at no cost. The 50 tickets shall be distributed via a pass
list at the event. If available, any tickets issued to the visiting institution above the 50 shall be billed at full face
value. (6/66, 12/80, 6/86, 10/90, 6/98, 8/98, 2/99, 11/03, 12/17)
8. Licensing Royalties.
The following royalties shall be paid for licensing activities involving the use of the Conference and institutional marks: (6/03, 6/11)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 25

ER 1-8-a

Recruiting

ER 3-1

a. One institution mark and the Conference mark: 14 percent total [12 percent for the institution (or its
licensing agent) and two percent for the Conference (or its licensing agent)]. (6/03, 6/11)
b. Two Conference institutions’ marks and the Conference mark: 14 percent total [six percent for each of
the institutions (or their licensing agent) and two percent for the Conference (or its licensing agent)]. (6/03,
6/11)
c. All Conference institutions’ marks and the Conference mark: 14 percent total [one percent for each of
the institutions (or their licensing agent) and two percent for the Conference (or its licensing agent)]. (6/03,
6/11)
d. Conference stand-alone royalty rate shall be 14 percent. (6/11)
9. Reserve Fund.
The Reserve Fund is to be used to maintain Conference operations should a catastrophic situation result in loss
of Conference revenue. (6/08)
Any expenditure from the Reserve Fund shall be approved by three-fourths vote of the entire Pac-12 Board of
Directors. (6/08, 8/10)
10. Amendments.
Amendments to ER 1 shall be approved by three-fourths vote of the entire Pac-12 Board of Directors. Proposals
for amendments may be made by the Pac-12 Board of Directors, the Commissioner, or the Council. All proposed amendments must be presented to the Pac-12 Board of Directors in writing. (8/10)

CHAPTER 2—RECRUITING
1. Recruiting.
The rules of the National Collegiate Athletic Association shall govern the recruiting of prospective studentathletes by Conference member institutions.
2. Letters of Intent.
The Conference annually subscribes to a voluntary National Letter of Intent program conducted by the Collegiate Commissioners Association. Member institutions and any prospective student-athlete who signs such a
Letter of Intent shall be bound by the regulations in effect at the time of such signing. (9/66)
3. Amendments.
Amendments to ER 2 shall be approved by three-fourths vote of the entire Pac-12 Board of Directors. Proposals
for amendments may be made by the Pac-12 Board of Directors, the Commissioner, or the Council. All proposed amendments must be presented to the Pac-12 Board of Directors in writing. (8/10)

CHAPTER 3—FINANCIAL AID TO STUDENT-ATHLETES
1. NCAA Rules.
The rules of the National Collegiate Athletic Association shall govern all matters concerning financial aid to
student-athletes except to the extent that the Pac-12 Board of Directors modifies such rules to be applied on a
conference-wide basis. (5/78, 12/96, 1/97, 8/10, 8/15)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 26

Financial Aid to Student-Athletes

ER 3-2

ER 3-3

2. Conference Rules.
Each member institution agrees to provide athletically related financial aid in accordance with the following
regulations. (Effective for aid agreements issued on or after August 1, 2015.) (8/15)
a. Degree Completion Benefit.
If a student-athlete withdraws from the institution prior to receiving athletically related financial aid for a
period of four years, he or she can return to the institution after exhausting athletics eligibility, and, during
a period that the institution has established for purposes of this benefit, receive, at a minimum, a proportional amount of educational expenses (i.e., tuition, fees, books) for the period remaining under the agreement. The student-athlete must meet the following criteria: (8/15)
i. Left the institution in good standing without violating any terms of the original agreement;
ii. Completed at least 50% of his or her degree program at the time of departure and at least one full
academic year at the institution; and
iii. Meets all institutional requirements for readmission (i.e., previous academic achievement, length of
absence, etc.). (8/15)
Student-athletes who return to the institution as part-time students after they have exhausted eligibility
shall receive, at a minimum, educational expenses (i.e., tuition, fees, books). In addition, student-athletes
in equivalency sports who received partial scholarships shall receive, at a minimum, educational expenses
proportional to the aid they received while originally enrolled. (8/15)
b. Completion of Baccalaureate Degree Prior to Exhausting Athletics Eligibility.
If an enrolled student-athlete completes his or her baccalaureate degree prior to exhausting his or her athletics eligibility, a member institution, at their discretion, may provide the student-athlete with athletically
related financial aid toward another degree if he or she returns to the team in a subsequent academic year
to participate in their remaining year(s) of athletics eligibility. (8/15)
c. Non-Completion of Baccalaureate Degree Within Four Years.
If a student-athlete fails to complete a baccalaureate degree within four academic years of full-time enrollment at the institution, he or she can return to the institution to complete their baccalaureate degree and
may receive athletically related financial aid in accordance with NCAA regulations. (8/15)
d. Cancellation of Athletically Related Financial Aid Due to Injury.
An enrolled student-athlete receiving athletically related financial aid who is injured to the point that he or
she is no longer able to participate cannot have their aid cancelled due to the injury. Institutions will follow
NCAA regulations in administrating this aid. (8/15)
e. Transferring to Another Institution.
The original institution is not required to provide these benefits (ER 3-2-(a)-1) should a student-athlete
transfer to another institution. (8/15)
3. Students Who are Not Qualifiers.
Member institutions shall not provide athletically related financial aid to any student who is a non-qualifier per
NCAA Bylaw 14.3.2 who initially enters a collegiate institution as a fulltime student during the Fall 1997 term
and thereafter, except as permitted in ER 4. (1/97, 6/05, 8/15)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 27

Student-Athlete Eligibility

ER 3-4

ER 4-1-b

4. Institutional Rules.
Each institution shall set forth conditions and amounts of athletically related financial aid according to its own
policies. Such aid may be reduced or canceled during the period of the award if the recipient: (8/15)
a.

Renders himself or herself ineligible for intercollegiate competition. (8/15)
(1) Professionalizing oneself without causing an NCAA violation (e.g., retaining a sports agent after
the season is completed, entering a professional league’s draft, etc.) does not constitute ineligibility for
purposes of this clause; (8/15)

b. Fraudulently misrepresents any information on an application, letter of intent or financial aid agreement; (8/15)
c.

Engages in serious misconduct warranting substantial disciplinary penalty; (8/15) or

d. Voluntarily (on his or her own initiative) withdraws from a sport at any time for personal reasons;
however, the recipient’s financial aid may not be awarded to another student-athlete in the academic term
in which the aid was reduced or canceled. A student-athlete’s request for written permission to contact
another four-year collegiate institution regarding a possible transfer does not constitute a voluntary withdrawal. In addition, professionalizing oneself without causing an NCAA violation (e.g., withdrawing from
an institution in order to enter a professional league’s draft, etc.) does not constitute a voluntary withdrawal for purposes of this rule. (8/15)
In addition to (a) through (d), an institutional financial aid agreement may include other non-athletic conditions (e.g., compliance with academic policies or standards, compliance with athletics department rules or policies) by which the aid may be reduced or canceled during the period of the award. (8/15)
5. Amendments.
Amendments to ER 3 shall be approved by three-fourths vote of the entire Pac-12 Board of Directors. Proposals
for amendments may be made by the Pac-12 Board of Directors, the Commissioner, or the Council. All proposed amendments must be presented to the Pac-12 Board of Directors in writing. (8/10)

CHAPTER 4—STUDENT-ATHLETE ELIGIBILITY
1. NCAA Rules.
The rules of the National Collegiate Athletic Association shall govern all matters of student-athlete eligibility
except to the extent that such rules are modified for practice and competition in Conference sports by regulations adopted by the Pac-12 Board of Directors. (12/96, 1/97, 8/10)
a. Eligibility and Participation Rules.
Student eligibility and participation rules for Conference teams and individuals are the NCAA rules of
eligibility, except where the Conference has a more strict rule or where special exceptions are made and
recorded in the Conference Handbook. (12/60, 5/78, 5/79, 1/97)
b. Recruiting Violations.
A student-athlete whose enrollment or attendance has been solicited by the certifying institution or any
representative of its athletics interests in violation of NCAA or Conference legislation as acknowledged
by the institution or established through the Conference’s or NCAA’s enforcement procedures shall not be
eligible for practice or competition in intercollegiate athletics at that institution. Reinstatement of eligibility
may be authorized by the NCAA or the Conference’s Compliance and Enforcement Committee as set forth
in CER 2-24. (12/81, 5/84, 8/10)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 28

Student-Athlete Eligibility

ER 4-2

ER 4-2-a

2. Nonqualifiers Initially Enrolling at Conference Institutions.
A nonqualifier, as defined in NCAA Bylaw 14.3, whose first fulltime collegiate enrollment occurs at a Conference institution during the Fall 1997 term and thereafter shall be permanently ineligible for competition, practice, or athletically related financial aid at any Conference institution unless granted a partial waiver by the
NCAA Division I Initial-Eligibility Waivers (IEW) Committee. (1/97, 6/05)
For each academic year, a Conference member may identify a maximum of four nonqualifiers who have been
granted partial waivers by the NCAA IEW Committee permitting them to receive aid and/or practice; these
four students shall be eligible for practice, competition, and athletically related financial aid per NCAA rules.
For each academic year, there shall be a maximum of two identified nonqualifiers who have been granted a
partial waiver in men’s sports and a maximum of two identified nonqualifiers who have been granted a partial
waiver in women’s sports, with no more than one identified nonqualifier permitted in any single sport. An
identified nonqualifier shall remain bound by NCAA initial-eligibility rules. All other nonqualifiers shall be
permanently ineligible for practice, competition, and athletically related financial aid at Conference institutions. (1/97, 2/98, 6/99, 6/05)
An identified nonqualifier who has had a partial waiver granted by the NCAA IEW Committee shall be assigned to one of the four slots of the academic year he or she first received athletically related financial aid;
otherwise, an identified partial qualifier shall be assigned to a slot for the academic year he or she originally
enrolled in the Conference institution or in the academic year he or she first reported for practice at the Conference institution. Thus, an identified nonqualifier may be assigned to a slot in an academic year that predates or
precedes the time of the assignment. Once an identified nonqualifier is assigned by an institution to a slot for a
particular academic year, that slot may not be reused by the institution. (1/97, 2/98, 6/99, 6/05)
a. Exceptions.
(1) A nonqualifier who, upon petition to the NCAA IEW Committee, is granted a partial waiver permitting him/her to receive aid and/or practice as an accommodation of his/her learning disability
shall be exempted from counting against the institution’s numerical limits for identified nonqualifiers.
(6/00, 6/05)
(2) This rule shall not apply to a prospective student-athlete who:
(a) Is not a qualifier per NCAA Bylaw 14.3; (6/97, 6/05)
(b) Initiates first-time, full-time collegiate enrollment at a Conference institution during the Fall
1997 term and thereafter; and (6/97)
(c) Meets each of the following conditions: (6/97)
i. The prospect has not been recruited by that institution, per NCAA Bylaw 13.02.13; and
(6/97)
ii. The prospect has not been offered any athletically-related financial aid, including, but not
limited to, a full or partial grant-in-aid; and (6/97, 6/05)
iii. The prospect was admitted to the institution without regard in any degree to athletics ability, and (6/97)
iv. The prospect is otherwise eligible under all NCAA, Conference, and institutional rules
which govern eligibility for practice, financial aid, and competition, except that: (6/97, 6/05)
(i) The student-athlete may not practice prior to the beginning of the second year of collegiate enrollment at the Conference institution; and (6/97)
(ii) The student-athlete may not receive athletically related aid prior to the beginning of
the third year of collegiate enrollment at the Conference institution. (6/97)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 29

Student-Athlete Eligibility

ER 4-2-a

ER 4-3-a-(4)

(3) Summer enrollment of a prospective student-athlete does not constitute enrollment in a Conference institution for purposes of this rule. (10/00, 6/05)
b. Waivers.
There shall be no waivers of any portion of ER 4-2. (6/99, 6/05)
3. Transfers.
a. Non-Conference Transfer.
Eligibility rules for a student who has transferred from a collegiate institution not a member of the Conference shall be as described by the NCAA, except as set forth below: (1/97, 6/97)
(1) Four-Year College Transfer.
A student who was not a qualifier (as defined in NCAA 14.3) who initially enrolls as a fulltime student
at a collegiate institution during the Fall 1997 term or thereafter and transfers to a Conference institution from a four-year college outside of the Conference shall be permanently ineligible for practice,
competition, and athletically related financial aid unless the individual (a) has met all NCAA transfer
rules, (b) has satisfactorily completed 48 semester or 72 quarter hours of transferable degree credits
with a cumulative grade-point average of 2.0, and (c) has attended the four-year college as a fulltime
student for at least three semesters or four quarters (excluding summer terms). (1/97, 6/97, 6/01, 6/05)
(a) Exception.
The provisions of ER 4-3-a-(1) shall not apply to a recruited foreign student-athlete who completed
secondary studies in a foreign country provided the student-athlete meets all NCAA four-year
college transfer requirements for competition upon initial fulltime enrollment at the Conference
institution. The student must demonstrate foreign residency and attendance at the foreign institution. (4/04, 12/13)
(2) Two-Year College and “4-2-4” Transfer.
A student who was not a qualifier (as defined in NCAA 14.3) who either transfers to a Conference institution directly from a two-year college or is a ‘4-2-4’ transfer and who initially enrolled as a fulltime
student at a collegiate institution during the Fall 1997 term or thereafter shall be permanently ineligible
for practice, competition, and athletically related financial aid unless the individual meets the applicable NCAA transfer rule requirements upon initial fulltime enrollment at the Conference institution.
(6/97, 6/01, 6/05)
(3) “2-4-4” Transfer.
A student who was not a qualifier (as defined in NCAA 14.3) who initially enrolled as a fulltime student at a two-year college during the Fall 1997 term or thereafter and who transfers from a two-year
college to a non-Conference four-year college and then to a Conference institution and who satisfied
the NCAA transfer rule requirements for competition for a two-year college transfer at the time of
transfer to the non-Conference four-year college shall be eligible for financial aid, practice, and competition at the Conference institution based upon NCAA four-year college transfer rules. (10/01, 6/05)
(4) Exception.
The provisions of ER 4-3-a-(1), ER 4-3-a-(2), or ER 4-3-a-(3) shall not apply to a transfer student-athlete
who: (a) is not a qualifier per NCAA Bylaw 14.3; (b) initiates full-time enrollment at a Conference insti-

2022-23 Handbook • Page 30

ER 4-3-a-(4)

Student-Athlete Eligibility

ER 4-3-d

tution during the Fall 1997 term and thereafter; and (c) meets each of the following conditions: (6/99,
10/01, 6/05)
(a) The transfer has not been recruited by that institution, per NCAA Bylaw 13.02.13; and (6/99)
(b) The transfer has not been offered any athletically-related financial aid, including, but not limited to, a full or partial grant-in-aid; and (6/99, 6/05)
(c) The transfer was admitted to the institution without regard in any degree to athletics ability.
(6/99, 6/01)
(5) Non-Conference Transfer Waivers.
No waiver of ER 4-3-a-(1), ER 4-3-a-(2), or ER 4-3-a-(3) shall be permitted for a student who is not a
qualifier (as defined in NCAA 14.3) who initially enrolled as a fulltime student at a collegiate institution during the Fall 1997 term or thereafter and transferred directly or indirectly from a non-Conference
institution. (5/81, 1/97, 6/97, 6/99, 10/01, 6/05)
b. Intra-Conference Transfer.
Eligibility for all intra-conference transfers entering their second conference institution in Fall 2021 and
thereafter shall be governed by NCAA legislation. (12/79, 1/92, 8/98, 6/04, 12/14, 7/19, 8/21)
(1) Nonqualifier Originally Enrolled at Conference Institution.
An individual who initially enrolled at a Conference institution as a recruited nonqualifier and who
was not identified by the institution as being eligible for financial aid, practice, and competition (see ER
4-2), and who subsequently transfers directly or indirectly to another Conference institution remains
permanently ineligible for practice, competition and athletically related financial aid. (2/98, 6/05)
(2) Intra-Conference Transfer Waivers.
NCAA transfer rule waivers and exceptions are not applicable to non-exempted intra-Conference transfers, except for those permitted under NCAA 14.5.5.2.6. All waivers of ER 4-3-b, except the droppedsport exception of NCAA 14.5.5.2.6, must be granted through the Conference petition process. (5/77,
5/84, 1/91, 6/91, 12/91, 10/00)
c. Mountain Pacific Sports Federation Transfers.
If a Mountain Pacific Sports Federation (MPSF) student-athlete transfers within his/her primary conference
(e.g., from Pac-12 institution to Pac-12 institution), that conference’s intra-conference transfer rule shall apply. If a MPSF student-athlete transfers to an institution outside his/her primary conference (e.g., from Big
West institution to Pac-12 institution), the NCAA’s four-year college transfer rule shall apply. (6/93, 6/11)
d. Misconduct Transfer Policy.
Student-athletes who transfer to a Conference institution, but who are ineligible to re-enroll at any college
or university that they attended within the last seven years for student behavior or academic misconduct
reasons, will be automatically deemed ineligible to receive athletic aid and cannot be a participant on an
NCAA intercollegiate team or participate in any team activities (competition, practice, strength & conditioning, off-season activities, etc.). This transfer limitation will apply as long as the student-athlete is ineligible to re-enroll at the previous college or university, and this rule applies whether the student is ineligible
at the time of transfer or is later deemed ineligible by a prior institution. This transfer policy will apply to
student misconduct issues only (e.g., assault, harassment, academic fraud and other violations of campus
behavior conduct policies). This transfer policy does not apply to student-athletes that are ineligible to re-

2022-23 Handbook • Page 31

ER 4-3-d

Student-Athlete Eligibility

ER 4-5-a

enroll based on academic performance reasons unrelated to misconduct (e.g., failure to maintain minimum
GPA, failure to meet NCAA continuing eligibility requirements, etc.). (8/16)
Each Conference institution will require its student-athlete transfer applicants to self-disclose whether they
are eligible to re-enroll at their prior institution(s). The Conference institution shall take appropriate action
under this ER 4-3-d based upon the self-disclosure of the student-athlete transfer and upon any actual
knowledge the institution may have concerning the student-athlete’s ineligibility for readmission at a prior
institution. (8/16)
(1) Appeals Process
Each Conference institution may create an appeal process for student-athletes who are deemed ineligible by this ER 4-3-d. The final determination of the appeal by the respective Conference institution
will be final. (8/16)
4. Other Eligibility Rules.
Except as otherwise provided herein, each institution shall establish the academic rules under which its student-athletes may be eligible for intercollegiate athletic competition.
a. Conference Championship Eligibility.
Except in the sport of rowing, non-Conference members who compete for Conference Championships
shall submit eligibility reports and NCAA Squad Lists to the Conference office to be audited. (6/86, 6/03)
5. Eligibility Petitions.
The Conference rules for loss of eligibility by a student have the purpose of preventing improper practices
relating to recruitment and participation. The Conference recognizes the necessity to protect the time-honored
practice of inter-institutional movement based on legitimate education goals and requirements as well as occasioned by personal or familial hardship.
There is established a waiver system to be administered by the Faculty Athletics Representatives Committee
through which all petitions for relief from application of the eligibility rules of the Conference for which a waiver process has been specified will be speedily and thoughtfully adjudicated. It is a right of any student-athlete
or prospective student-athlete to petition the Committee through an institution, and the Faculty Representative
has a responsibility to forward all petitions to the Committee. A petition may be presented at any time during a
student-athlete’s academic career. A petition on behalf of a student-athlete or prospective student-athlete may
be submitted to the Committee only after the student-athlete has enrolled and attended classes or has engaged
in organized practice at the petitioning institution or after the prospective student-athlete has been admitted to
the petitioning institution. (5/72, 5/74, 6/90, 6/99)
It is the Faculty Representative’s duty to determine all of the facts surrounding all petitions and to counsel
the student-athlete or prospective student-athlete to refrain from making statements that are not germane to
the petition. The transmittal of the petition will, in any event, include the analysis and recommendation of the
Faculty Representative of the institution presenting the petition. (5/74, 6/99)
a. Petition Procedures.
A petition for waiver of an eligibility regulation may be presented at a meeting of the Faculty Athletics
Representatives Committee. If the urgency of the petition precludes taking action at the next scheduled
meeting of the Committee, the petition may be acted upon by overnight mail or email. Member institutions
should make every effort to present eligibility petitions at scheduled meetings. Petitions presented during
the summer especially should be avoided. (6/90, 6/99, 6/08)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 32

Student-Athlete Eligibility

ER 4-5-b

ER 4-5-b

b. Petition Form.
All petitions are to be in written form and will be permanently filed in the Conference office. The petition
shall consist of a completed eligibility petition and other pertinent documents.
ELIGIBILITY PETITION NO.:
Date of Mailing:
Full Name of Student
Subject:
Eligibility Rule
Academic Information:
Sport Involved
Complete Competition Record:
Complete Practice Record (for injury or illness)
Financial Aid:				Letter of Intent
Circumstances:
Eligibility Consequences of Waiver
Comment, including Faculty Representative’s Recommendation:
Attachments: Student’s statement. Where pertinent, parent’s statement, coach’s statement, medical certification signed by the appropriate physician.
In cases of hardship for injury or illness, the medical certification must include:
1) Diagnosis of injury or illness, including medical reason for disqualifying student-athlete from competition. (6/98)
2) Date of onset of injury or illness: (6/98)
a.

Date medical attention first sought for injury or illness, if different than above. (6/98)

b. Was injury or illness a recurrence of a preexisting condition? If yes, please describe. (6/98)
3) What practice restrictions, if any, were imposed on the student-athlete as a result of the injury or illness.
(6/98)
a.

Beginning date of restrictions. (6/98)

b. Ending date of restrictions. (6/98)
c.

How frequently the student-athlete was evaluated during the period of restrictions. (6/98)

4) Specific date student-athlete was medically cleared for competition. (6/98)
5) If the student-athlete was cleared to return to competition before the end of the season, the extent to
which the student-athlete able to return to his/her pre-injury (or pre-illness) competitive level. (6/98)
6) Additional comments, if any, related to whether the illness or injury was of an “incapacitating” nature
that precluded competition for the remainder of the playing season. (6/98)
7) The athletic trainer’s summary of the student-athlete’s rehabilitation history in conjunction with this
injury or illness. (6/98)
The petition also must include competition information, including the midpoint of the playing season, the
number of contests completed or scheduled by the institution, and the number of contests in which the
student-athlete competed. (6/90, 10/05)
For intra-Conference transfer waiver petitions, a letter from the Faculty Representative of the Conference
member from which the student has transferred must be a part of the petition. (6/08)
Any eligibility petition that includes student-athlete medical information (e.g., hardship waiver, medical
absence waiver) shall include a completed Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)
release form. (10/10)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 33

ER 4-5-c

Student-Athlete Eligibility

ER 4-6

c. Petitions Presented at Meetings.
A waiver petition transmitted by a Faculty Representative and received by the Conference office at least 21
days prior to a scheduled Conference meeting will be considered at that meeting. A petition received after
the 21-day deadline may be considered if such consideration is granted unanimous consent by the Committee. (6/90, 12/90, 6/96, 6/07)
(1) Consent Packages.
The Conference office shall prepare a consent package of petitions to be approved by the Faculty Athletics Representatives Committee. A petition may be removed from the consent package by any member of the Faculty Athletics Representatives Committee. (6/90, 6/96)
d. Petitions Presented Between Meetings.
A petition may be presented between meetings (through the student’s Faculty Representative) only if the
Faculty Representative shows that the urgency warrants it. The Faculty Representative shall transmit the
petition to the Commissioner, who will send copies of the petition to each Faculty Representative by overnight mail or email for a vote. The option to present a petition between meetings shall be used only for
those petitions af﻿fecting the immediate eligibility of a student-athlete whose sports season is in progress
or will begin before the next in-person meeting of the FARC. The Commissioner shall review the petition
for completeness and adherence to rules and procedures and indicate whether it would have been placed
in a consent package had it been presented at an in-person meeting before forwarding it to the Committee.
(6/90, 6/99, 6/08)
Any institution may request additional information on a petition presented between meetings, or request
a delayed ballot pending clarification of the petition. In such cases, that institution must contact the Commissioner within 14 calendar days of the date of distribution of the petition with such a request. If the additional information or clarification does not satisfy the institution, the institution may request a conference
telephone call to discuss the petition and obtain the vote. (6/90, 6/08)
e. Voting Procedures.
Eligibility petitions shall be approved by three-fourths vote of the entire FARC. (5/74, 5/75, 12/90, 6/08,
8/10)
For a petition distributed between meetings, FARC members are free to cast or change their votes within
14 calendar days from the date the Conference office has distributed the petition, During this 14-day voting
period, all votes or comments submitted by a FARC member shall be provided to every other member. If a
sufficient number of votes have been received during the 14-day voting period to determine the outcome
of the petition, FARC members shall be notified and provided with a 24-hour period for further discussion
and voting. At the conclusion of the 14-day voting period if no negative vote has been recorded, the petition will be ruled approved by consent. If one or more negative votes has been recorded, the Commissioner
shall contact the non-replying faculty representatives for their votes. (5/75, 5/81, 5/82, 6/90, 12/90, 6/95,
8/98, 6/08)
Results of the voting on all eligibility petitions shall be announced by the Commissioner. Favorable action
on a petition is applicable only to that sport shown on the petition. (5/74, 5/75, 12/90)
6. Amendments.
Amendments to ER 4 shall be approved by three-fourths vote of the entire Pac-12 Board of Directors. Proposals
for amendments may be made by the Pac-12 Board of Directors, the Commissioner, or the Council. All proposed amendments must be presented to the Pac-12 Board of Directors in writing. (8/10)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 34

Institutional Eligibility

ER 5-1

ER 6-1-c

CHAPTER 5—INSTITUTIONAL ELIGIBILITY
1. Eligibility for Conference Championships.
An institution prohibited from competing in post-season competition by the NCAA (for example, due to Academic Performance Program penalties) or the Conference shall not be eligible for the Conference Championship in the cited sport(s), but its games against Conference opponents shall count in the Conference standings.
Such an institution also may not compete in a Conference event that determines the Conference’s automatic
qualifier for the NCAA Championship in that sport. Institutions prohibited from competing in post-season
competition may participate in revenue sharing derived from Conference members’ participation in post-season competition, unless such revenue sharing is prohibited as a result of an NCAA or Conference sanction.
(12/81, 6/03, 6/12)
2. Amendments.
Amendments to ER 5 shall be approved by three-fourths vote of the entire Pac-12 Board of Directors. Proposals
for amendments may be made by the Pac-12 Board of Directors, the Commissioner, or the Council. All proposed amendments must be presented to the Pac-12 Board of Directors in writing. (8/10)

CHAPTER 6—SCHEDULING
1. General Policy.
All members of the Conference, in the exercise of the principle of free choice of opponents, hereby agree to
schedule each other in football, men’s and women’s basketball, and women’s volleyball and to the extent feasible in other sports. (5/77, 5/78, 8/85, 12/85, 6/89, 12/89, 10/00, 6/05, 10/10)
a. Football.
Member institutions shall be aligned into a North Division (consisting of California, Oregon, Oregon State,
Stanford, Washington, and Washington State) and a South Division (consisting of Arizona, Arizona State,
Colorado, UCLA, USC, and Utah). Conference competition shall consist of a nine-game schedule consisting
of five intra-divisional games and four inter-divisional games each year, with California, Stanford, UCLA,
and USC competing against each other each year and the remaining inter-divisional games scheduled on
a rotating basis. (10/10)
(1) Championship Game.
A Conference Championship Game shall be hosted by the divisional champion with the best won-lost
percentage in Conference games. (10/10)
b. Men’s Basketball.
Conference competition shall consist of an 18-game regular-season schedule, with the opponents to be determined annually on a rotating basis except that each team shall play its traditional rival at home and on
the road each season, and participation in a Conference postseason tournament. (6/11)
c. Women’s Basketball.
Conference competition shall consist of an 18-game regular-season schedule, with the opponents to be determined annually on a rotating basis and each team shall play its traditional rival at home and on the road
each season, and participation in a Conference postseason tournament. (6/11)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 35

Student-Athlete Well-Being

ER 6-1-d

ER 7-1-a-(1)

d. Women’s Volleyball.
Conference competition shall consist of a 20-match regular-season schedule, with the opponents to be determined annually on a rotating basis except that each team shall play its traditional rival at home and on
the road each season. (6/11)
2. Scheduling Relationships.
Membership in the Conference shall in no way affect the right of each member to continue or establish relations
with any institution, except as mandated herein. (8/85)
a. Non-Conference Neutral Site Football Games.
No member institution shall enter into an agreement to play a neutral-site football game (except in circumstances where such neutral-site game is the away leg of a home-and-home series) unless such agreement
provides the Conference with the exclusive broadcast rights and digital rights in all media, and copyright
to such neutral-site game. (5/11)
3. Conference Football Games.
In the sport of football, it shall not be required for Conference members to execute individual contracts governing play of their nine annual Conference games. Those games shall be conducted under the terms and
conditions established in SPR 6 and other applicable Conference regulations, including the provisions of ER 1,
Financial Distribution, and AR 2, Radio and Television Policies. (5/78, 12/85, 1/89, 2/92, 6/05)
Each member of the Conference at all times pertinent herein shall have been deemed to have entered into agreements for nine annual football games with the other members of the Conference and shall be guaranteed that
those games will be played as scheduled under such schedules as may be adopted by the Conference from time
to time. (5/78, 12/85, 1/89, 2/92, 6/05, 8/10, 10/10)
4. Amendments.
Amendments to ER 6 shall be approved by three-fourths vote of the entire Pac-12 Board of Directors. Proposals
for amendments may be made by the Pac-12 Board of Directors, the Commissioner, or the Council. All proposed amendments must be presented to the Pac-12 Board of Directors in writing. (8/10)

CHAPTER 7—STUDENT-ATHLETE WELL-BEING
1. General Policy.
The well-being of each student-athlete in their intercollegiate athletics programs is of primary importance to the
member institutions of the Conference, and transcends participation by the individual in athletics. (6/06)
To support and assure student-athlete well-being, each member institution will make available: (6/06)
a. Academic Support.
Academic support to enable the student-athlete to realize maximum benefits from the educational opportunities available on the campus. (6/06)
1) Scheduling Graduate School Exams.
Any student-athlete who seeks admission into a graduate degree program is permitted to independently schedule and take required graduate school examinations during a sport’s non-championship or out-of-season segments without pre-approval from coaching staff members. A student-athlete shall provide notice to the appropriate coaching staff and academic advisor of their scheduled
graduate school examinations, and any exam date/time changes, once those exam details have
2022-23 Handbook • Page 36

Student-Athlete Well-Being

ER 7-1-a-(1)

ER 7-1-g

been finalized or updated. Should a scheduled exam date and time conflict with a team practice,
workout, meeting, competition or other required activity, the student-athlete is permitted to miss
the activity in order to complete the graduate entrance exam without penalty or retaliation. Any
coaching staff member found to (a) disrupt a student-athlete’s attempt to schedule a graduate
school exam or (b) punish or retaliate against a student-athlete for scheduling a graduate school
exam that conflicts with a required team activity will be subject to admonishment by the conference
and institution. (8/21)
b. Financial Aid.
Financial aid to the extent possible at the institution to assist the student-athlete in achieving an undergraduate degree. (6/06)
c. Physical and Mental Health Programs.
Physical and mental health programs, education, and assistance, including guidance concerning optimal
nutrition for a high-performance athlete. The health programs should include the availability of experienced doctors and trainers to address injuries and aid the student-athlete in returning to competition following injury. (6/06)
d. Health and Medical Expenses.
Comprehensive health and medical expenses to enrolled student-athletes for injuries incurred through
their participation in intercollegiate athletics. (8/15)
e. Medical Expenses for Former Student-Athletes.
Medical expenses for former student-athletes that directly relate to an injury suffered by the student-athlete
through his or her participation in intercollegiate athletics at the institution. Member institutions must
provide such direct medical expenses for either (1) a minimum period of four years following the studentathlete’s graduation or separation from the institution or (2) until the student-athlete turns 26 years of age,
whichever occurs first. The provision of such direct medical expenses, whether by institutional treatment
and/or rehabilitation, procuring insurance, and/or the reimbursement or direct payment of fees, among
other methods, shall be established by each member institution. Each member institution shall also establish its own policies and procedures related to student-athlete eligibility for this benefit, which may include
the required disclosure of pre-existing conditions not related to participation in intercollegiate athletics,
mandatory reporting of injuries suffered during athletics participation at the institution, required participation in an exit physical upon graduation or separation from the institution, and other criteria that an institution deems appropriate. [Effective for injuries incurred during the 2015-16 academic year and thereafter.
The original institution is not required to provide this benefit (ER 7-1-e) should a student-athlete transfer
to another institution.] (8/15)
f.

Qualified Coaches and Safe Practice and Competition Sites.

Qualified coaching and attractive and safe practice and competitive facilities which enable the studentathlete to realize his/her athletic potential. (6/06)
g. Institutional Anonymous Reporting System for Harassment.
Institutions shall be required to provide a confidential, anonymous reporting system for student-athletes
to report instances of racial harassment or other harassing behavior and to enhance educational efforts
regarding the availability of this reporting system for student-athletes. Member institution shall have the
autonomy to select and implement a reporting system that works on each respective campus to meet this
Conference requirement. (7/22)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 37
Updated 7/1/22

ER 7-2-h

Exchange of Information

ER 9-1

h. Career Counseling.
Career counseling services to assist the student-athlete following his/her college career. (6/06)
To assure well-being and a safe environment, the institution also shall take appropriate steps to prevent the
hazing of any members of its intercollegiate athletics teams, including providing informational or educational programs to coaches and student-athletes about the possible ramifications of hazing any individual
under any circumstances. (6/06)s
2. Amendments.
Amendments to ER 7 shall be approved by three-fourths vote of the entire Pac-12 Board of Directors. Proposals
for amendments may be made by the Pac-12 Board of Directors, the Commissioner, or the Council. All proposed amendments must be presented to the Pac-12 Board of Directors in writing. (8/10)

CHAPTER 8—EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION
1. Available Records.
Eligibility, competition, and financial aid records are sent to the Commissioner’s office, which is a central depository for all such records. (6/01)
a. NCAA Squad-List Forms.
An NCAA Squad-List Form (per NCAA 14.10.2 and 15.5.11) shall be sent for each varsity intercollegiate
sport to the office of the Commissioner as soon as administratively possible during the season of the sport.
It shall include the pertinent financial aid information to document an institution’s compliance with NCAA
and Conference financial aid limitations legislation. Institutions shall also submit a list of student-athletes
who are team members but ineligible for competition. (6/96, 6/01, 6/09)
b. Sport Sponsorship Form.
Each member institution shall report to the Conference office by August 1 of each year the Conference
championships in which it will compete during the following academic year. (5/84, 6/96, 6/01)
c. Auditing of Information.
The Conference office shall audit the information submitted and is authorized to seek additional information required to determine a student-athlete’s eligibility status or an institution’s compliance with NCAA
and Conference financial aid limitations legislation. (1/72, 5/73, 5/75, 5/78, 6/96, 6/01)
2. Amendments.
Amendments to ER 8 shall be approved by two-thirds vote of the entire Pac-12 Board of Directors. Proposals for
amendments may be made by the Pac-12 Board of Directors, the Commissioner, or the Council. All proposed
amendments must be presented to the Pac-12 Board of Directors in writing. (8/10)

CHAPTER 9—RECOMMENDED HIRING POLICIES
When conducting searches for athletics department administrators or head coaches in sports as prescribed, it
shall be the recommended policy of the Conference that a member institution make good-faith efforts. (10/07)
a. When interviewing to hire an administrator, to include at least one ethnic minority candidate in the pool
of interviewees; (10/07)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 38

ER 9-1

Recommended Hiring Policies

ER 9-1

b. When interviewing for the head coaching position in football and men’s or women’s basketball, to include at least one ethnic minority candidate in the pool of interviewees; (10/07)
c. When interviewing for the head coaching position in any women’s intercollegiate sport, to include at
least one female candidate in the pool of interviewees. (10/07)
d. When interviewing to hire an administrator, coach or other support staff position (e.g., athletic trainer,
academic advisor, etc.), to actively include current student-athletes in the hiring process. (7/22)
2. Amendments.
Amendments to ER 9 shall be approved by two-thirds vote of the entire Pac-12 Board of Directors. Proposals for
amendments may be made by the Pac-12 Board of Directors, the Commissioner, or the Council. All proposed
amendments must be presented to the Pac-12 Board of Directors in writing. (8/10)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 39
Updated 7/1/22

ER 9-2

Recommended Hiring Policies

2022-23 Handbook • Page 40

ER 9-2

COMPLIANCE &
ENFORCEMENT
REGULATIONS
CER

Subject

Page

Chapter 1—Interpretive Policies. ........................................................................................... 42
Chapter 2—Investigative Policies. ......................................................................................... 42
Chapter 3—Controversies. ...................................................................................................... 43
Chapter 4—Support of Conference Programs, Standards of Conduct, Action by Commissioner 45
Chapter 5—Sportsmanship..................................................................................................... 50

2022-23 Handbook • Page 41

CER 1-1

Interpretive Policies

CER 2-2

CHAPTER 1—INTERPRETIVE POLICIES
1. Official Interpreter.
The Commissioner shall serve as the official interpreter of rules and regulations prescribed in the Conference
handbook. (7/20)
2. Announcements.
The Commissioner shall circulate announcements of all official interpretations of Conference rules and regulations to members of the Council and the Pac-12 Board of Directors as appropriate. The Commissioner shall
distribute to all Conference institutions a redacted version of a Conference or NCAA rules interpretation that
it has provided to an institution, upon request by any Conference institution. Additionally, the Commissioner
may distribute to all Conference institutions sanitized versions of other interpretations from time to time, as the
Commissioner in his discretion deems appropriate. To the extent possible, these shared Conference interpretations would be kept in a database maintained by the Conference office, accessible to the Conference members.
(12/91, 6/01, 6/10, 7/20)
3. Review by Council.
Official interpretations of Conference rules and regulations by the Commissioner shall be subject only to overrule or modification by a majority vote of the Council. Such review shall be requested within five business days
of the Commissioner’s interpretation and the review shall then be completed within an additional five business days. If the Council changes an interpretation made by the Commissioner, the Council also shall rule as to
whether the change is retroactive to the time that the interpretation was made by the Commissioner, or whether
the change is effective at the time it is voted by the Council. (5/73, 12/91, 6/10)
4. NCAA Rules Interpretations.
Requests for interpretations of NCAA rules are to be presented to the NCAA solely through the Conference
office, thus creating a common clearinghouse for such information. If, however, an instance arises where time
does not permit such action, a request for an interpretation may be made by a member institution directly to the
NCAA but the Conference office must be notified of the request and response as soon as feasible. (12/91, 7/20)

CHAPTER 2—INVESTIGATIVE POLICIES
1. General Policy.
It shall be the policy of the Conference to assist institutions in all NCAA enforcement matters. (8/13)
The Commissioner, assisted by the compliance and enforcement staff members, shall serve as the principal
enforcement officer regarding adherence to Conference rules and regulations. (6/98, 6/10, 8/13)
The Conference shall establish a Compliance and Enforcement Committee to review violations of Conference
rules. (6/10, 8/13)
2. Reinstatement of Eligibility.
In those cases in which an infraction results in a student-athlete’s ineligibility and time is of the essence in
making a determination of future eligibility, the Compliance and Enforcement Committee is vested with the
authority to function as an eligibility committee for the Conference. The Council shall have the authority to
review and reverse the Compliance and Enforcement Committee’s determination of eligibility. Any action in
this respect shall require a two-thirds majority of those institutions eligible to vote, with the involved studentathlete’s institution abstaining.

2022-23 Handbook • Page 42

Controversies

CER 2-2

CER 3-1-b

Action by the NCAA to reinstate a student-athlete’s eligibility shall automatically be accepted by the Conference unless one of the following conditions applies:
a. The case involves a Conference rule which is more stringent than that of the NCAA or a sport not governed by the NCAA.
b. Resolution of the case without Conference review could result in damage to intra-Conference relationships. (12/81, 12/85)

CHAPTER 3—CONTROVERSIES
1. General Policy.
It shall be the duty of the Commissioner to promote harmony among Conference member institutions by handling controversies that have arisen or appear likely to arise. For purposes of this rule, a “controversy” is defined as any dispute, problem, or grievance between two or more member institutions that does not constitute
an alleged violation of Conference or NCAA rules, or that is not specifically to be dealt with pursuant to provisions of the Conference Constitution and Bylaws, or other Executive or Administrative Rules. (6/86, 6/11)
a. Informal Procedure.
Initially the Commissioner shall attempt to resolve a controversy informally and through personal mediation with the institutions involved. (6/86)
b. Formal Procedure.
(1) In the event that a controversy is not resolved by informal procedures, then the Director of Athletics of any complainant university shall prepare a written statement setting forth in detail the nature of
the controversy and all pertinent circumstances, and shall direct a copy to the Commissioner and to the
Director of Athletics of each of the member institutions involved. The latter shall investigate the matter to the extent necessary and shall render a prompt response as to the validity of the complaint, and
in the event that it is valid, as to the corrective measures taken or to be taken. Copies of such response
shall be sent to the Commissioner and to the Director of Athletics of each member institution involved
in the controversy. (6/86)
(2) In the event the reply of each responding university satisfies the complainant university, the matter
shall be considered closed. (6/86)
(3) If the complainant university is not satisfied with the statement submitted by a respondent university, the Director of Athletics of the complainant university may submit the matter to the Commissioner. (6/86)
(4) The Commissioner, upon receipt of the information from any member university that it has not
been able to resolve satisfactorily a controversy with a member university, will convene a meeting of
representatives of the universities involved at the Conference office or any other mutually agreeable
location. The Commissioner will, during the course of such meeting, make every possible effort to resolve the differences between the universities. (6/86)
(5) If unable to resolve the existing differences between the universities concerned, the Commissioner
will then prepare a formal report setting forth the findings as to the merits of the alleged complaint.
This report will be submitted to the Chancellors and Presidents of the universities concerned for final
disposition of the alleged complaint. (6/86)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 43

CER 3-1-c

Controversies

CER 3-2-e

c. Procedures for Controversies that Seriously Impact the Entire Conference.
In the event that a controversy is of major significance to the Conference as a whole, so the private resolution among individual members cannot avert its impact, or if the Chancellors or Presidents of the involved
institutions are unable to resolve it pursuant to CER 3-1-b-(5), the Commissioner shall confer, in his discretion, at the earliest convenient time with the Pac-12 Board of Directors Executive Committee or the Council
Executive Committee to determine a proper course of action. Such action may include, but need not be
limited to, referral to the appropriate Administrative Committee, the Council, or the Board of Directors.
(6/86, 6/10, 12/21)
2. Recruiting Code of Ethics.
Although the recruitment of prospective student-athletes can be as intense as competition on the athletic field,
the recruitment process can and should be a positive experience for all involved parties. The right of a prospective student-athlete to obtain factual information to aid in the decision process must be respected. At the same
time, a recruiter must refrain from making degrading or derogatory comments about other institutions and
their programs and personnel. To this end, the following Code of Ethics has been adopted by the Conference to
provide guidance for representatives of its member institutions in their recruiting activities.
a.

Ethical conduct is required of all persons engaged in any form of recruitment of student-athletes.

b. The responsibility for ethical recruiting practices ultimately rests with the President or Chancellor of
each member institution.
c. All individuals involved in the recruiting process shall comply with all NCAA and Conference recruiting rules.
d. Recruiters shall observe the following guidelines during their recruiting activities:
(1) The prospective student-athlete and the prospect’s family are individuals who have the right of
free choice and shall be considered to have the intelligence and good sense to make the choice that is
best for the prospect.
(2) A request by the prospective student-athlete and/or family to be subjected to no further contact
shall be respected.
(3) No oral or written promise, either direct or implied, will indicate that more benefits are available to
the prospect than the institution actually will furnish.
(4) Although comparisons between institutions may be made, it shall be the obligation of the recruiter
to assure that any statement made about another institution is factual.
(5) A recruiter should not be involved in the decision-making process affecting institutions other than
his or her own. However, general statements in support of the Conference are encouraged.
e. Types of statements or activities that are specif﻿ically prohibited under the provisions of the Code of
Ethics include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Statements that are false, misleading, or malicious.
(2) Statements intended to degrade other institutions (e.g., a statement about the financial instability
of another institution’s athletics department).
(3) Statements of a speculative nature (e.g., speculation about the outcome of an NCAA investigation
or a coach’s continued employment).
(4) Statements against a person (e.g., statements about an individual’s integrity, sexual orientation, or
history of previous substance abuse). (3/65, 12/89, 6/01)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 44

CER 3-3

SupportofConferencePrograms,StandardsofConduct,ActionbyCommissioner

CER 4-3-a

3. Violations of Recruiting Code of Ethics.
Violations of the Conference’s Recruiting Code of Ethics shall, for the most part, be processed through informal
discussions between the appropriate parties (e.g., head coach-to-head coach, athletics director-to-athletics director). However, in the case of an alleged blatant violation (as determined by the Commissioner), or repeated
violations involving the same institution, or in instances where informal procedures do not result in satisfaction
to the complainant institution, the Conference office shall be authorized to investigate and to present formal
allegations to the Compliance and Enforcement Committee. (12/89)

CHAPTER 4—SUPPORT OF CONFERENCE PROGRAMS, STANDARDS OF CONDUCT,
ACTION BY COMMISSIONER
1. Support of Programs, Misconduct, Sportsmanship.
Support by each member institution and its representatives of the Conference’s programs, regulations, and
administrative and game officials is required by the Duties and Obligations of Conference membership. This
Regulation stipulates how that support must be demonstrated and what punitive action by the Conference
may be anticipated by a member when it is absent, or when Conference regulations are broken in a manner or
to a degree which dictates an immediate or timely action taken by the Commissioner rather than a Conference
response through the formal enforcement procedures. This Regulation pertains particularly to misconduct by
an individual, to the lack of support of the Conference’s officiating programs, or to situations where prompt
action or response by the Conference is especially pertinent (8/85, 6/96).
The Pac-12 Board of Directors has determined that violations involving regulations governing administrator,
coach or student-athlete conduct are to be regarded as most serious, will not be condoned, and shall subject
violators to the assessment of significant penalties. (6/87, 6/96)
2. Scope of Regulation.
The provisions of this chapter (CER 4) shall be applicable to all interactions and communications by Conference
or institutional personnel with one another. In addition, the provisions of this chapter (CER 4) shall extend to all
conduct by Conference or institutional personnel engaged in at any time in connection with their participation
in any practice; scrimmage; exhibition; appearance in preseason, regular season or postseason contests, including but not limited to Conference and NCAA Championships, bowl games, all star games, or foreign tours;
whether against Conference institutions or others. This chapter shall extend to any conduct engaged in by
Conference or institutional personnel at or around such events, including, but not limited to the following: conduct engaged in while traveling to and from or while staying at the site of an event described above, and any
conduct engaged in at any time the individual is representing the institution or the Conference. “Conference or
institutional personnel,” as used in this chapter (CER 4), shall include all coaches; student-athletes; spirit group
members, mascots, and members of the band; athletics department administrators and other institutional staff
members; game officials; coordinators of officiating; Conference office administrators; and any representatives
or agents of the Conference or of any Conference institution. (6/96, 6/00)
3. Standards of Conduct.
a. Coaches and Institutional Personnel.
Each coach and institutional employee (“personnel”) must remember at all times, even in the midst of the
emotion of a contest, that he or she is a representative of a nationally prominent institution of higher education, its administration, its student body, and its faculty. Accordingly, he or she will be expected to conduct
himself or herself in a manner which will reflect credit on the institution and the Conference and create a
collegiate atmosphere in which to conduct competition. Proper conduct also is essential to crowd control,
to which the Conference has assigned a high priority to assure that attendance at Conference contests is a
safe and enjoyable experience. (6/87, 6/96)
2022-23 Handbook • Page 45

CER 4-3-a

SupportofConferencePrograms,StandardsofConduct,ActionbyCommissioner

CER 4-3-e

Each coach must be aware that he or she is an example to the student-athletes and other students, and, consistent with his or her influence and visibility, must meet a particularly high standard. The coach’s conduct
will be judged by that standard. (6/87, 6/96)
b. Student-Athletes.
Each Conference student-athlete must remember at all times, even in the midst of the emotion of a contest,
that he or she is a representative of a nationally prominent institution of higher education, its administration, its student body, and its faculty. Accordingly, he or she will be expected to conduct himself or herself in
a manner which will reflect credit on the institution and the Conference and create a collegiate atmosphere
in which to conduct competition. Proper conduct also is essential to crowd control, to which the Conference has assigned a high priority to assure that attendance at Conference contests is a safe and enjoyable
experience. (6/87, 6/96)
c. Officials.
Each contest official or replay official is to conduct himself/herself in a manner which will not discredit
college athletics or the Conference. Included are derogatory public comments, inappropriate comments to
participants and to spectators, and actions in or outside the playing venue. (6/94, 6/96, 9/07)
Officials, by virtue of their positions, are exposed to privileged information regarding the personnel and
activities of Conference teams. Under no circumstances may an official relay such information or comment
regarding officials, officiating of Conference contests, coaches, or other personnel to the general public, the
media, or the personnel of any institution. (6/94)
Further, a Conference on-field or replay official: (9/07)
(1) May never, under any circumstances, place a wager of any nature on a college, professional, amateur or other sports contest in a sport sponsored by the NCAA. (9/07)
(2) May not engage in a sports gambling pool of any nature, including an informal pool, such as an
“office pool” or a fantasy league. (9/07)
(3) May not provide information regarding any sports event or activity to any individual or organization involved in or associated with any type of sports wagering activities, and must report to the Conference immediately any contact or approach of any nature intended to obtain such information. (9/07)
(4) Must understand the special nature of being a college sports official and the special access to stadiums, arenas, team activities, institutional personnel and other officials which that role allows him/
her, and never use those advantages in any way to influence the outcome of any game or to assist those
who might wish to do so. (9/07)
d. Contact Between Coaches and Officials.
In all sports, contact between coaches and officials (including, in the sport of football, instant replay officials) shall be restricted. Contact to question or discuss a specific contest, play or officiating decision is
prohibited. Contact during a contest shall be limited as prescribed by the playing rules. Permissible contact
would be to arrange for the officiating of a scrimmage or to convey administrative details concerning a
game assignment. A coach may never make physical contact with an official, and is prohibited from entering the officials’ dressing room at any contest in which a Conference institution is participating. In general,
communications by coaches and officials concerning any of the Conference’s officiating programs should
be addressed to the Coordinator of Officiating in the appropriate sport. (6/94, 6/96, 11/05, 6/08)
e. Comments Pertaining to Officiating and Fighting Incidents.
Because comments pertaining to officiating not only create doubts about the credibility of the Conference’s
officiating program, but also may influence how future contests are officiated, thereby affecting the equity
2022-23 Handbook • Page 46

CER 4-3-e

SupportofConferencePrograms,StandardsofConduct,ActionbyCommissioner

CER 4-4-a

of competition within the Conference, Conference institutional personnel are prohibited from oral or written comments on officiating matters of any nature other than to the Conference office. All reports to the
Conference office pertaining to officiating, game management, student-athletes, coaches, or officials shall
be forwarded through the institution’s members of the Athletics Directors Committee or the Senior Woman
Administrators Committee. (6/96)
Institutional personnel may not make public derogatory comment on officiating to the media during postgame interviews or at other times; on radio or television shows; at booster groups; in institutional news releases or other institutionally published materials, such as a coach’s newsletter or game program; or under
any conditions when their comments may become public. (6/96)
A coach shall be fully responsible for assuring that no derogatory public comments on officiating are made
by any student-athlete on his or her team. (6/96)
A coach shall not address or permit anyone in the team area to address uncomplimentary remarks to any
official during the progress of a contest, or engage in conduct which might incite student-athletes or spectators against the officials.
A coach shall be fully responsible for assuring that no public comments about fighting incidents which occur during a game contest are made by the coaching staff or any student-athlete on the team. (6/91, 6/94,
6/96)
4. Commissioner’s Authority Regarding Misconduct.
The Commissioner shall be responsible for ensuring sportsmanlike conduct in compliance with Conference
regulations and imposing disciplinary actions in response to misconduct at, during or related to Conference
competition, and shall have the authority to act in the best interests of the Conference in support of its programs, sportsmanship policies and standards of conduct. The Commissioner shall determine whether immediate action, timely action or referred action is required in response to a matter of misconduct. As provided below,
a range of penalties shall be available to the Commissioner in this role as deemed necessary to assure compliance with the Conference goals stated in CER 4. The penalties provided in the playing rules of the respective
sports may be exceeded when the Commissioner judges it necessary. (6/96)
a. Immediate Action.
In the event that immediate action is needed to alleviate or control a situation which by its nature and
possible effect threatens orderly administration or operation of the Conference or its programs and/or precludes the timetable of due process contained herein, the Commissioner shall have the authority to so act
at his/her sole discretion. (6/91, 6/96)
Examples of events which would require immediate action include, but are not limited to, the following:
(6/91, 6/96)
• Allegation of serious misconduct requiring immediate suspension of institutional personnel or
student-athletes from competition.
• Instances where the Commissioner deems it necessary to protect the equity and integrity of Conference competition.
• Protection of the Conference’s officiating program, particularly in an instance where public comments by an institutional representative may affect Conference competition.
• Any instance or circumstance which might affect the safety of officials, participants in, or spectators attending Conference competition. (5/84, 5/85, 6/87, 6/96)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 47

CER 4-4-a-(1) SupportofConferencePrograms,StandardsofConduct,ActionbyCommissioner

CER 4-4-c

(1) Process of Notification, Review and Release.
Within 24 hours of an act of misconduct being brought to the attention of the Conference office, and
after the Commissioner has determined that immediate action is warranted, the Commissioner or designee shall contact a senior official of the institution to advise that the misconduct is being reviewed.
(8/15)
Following a review of the incident, the Commissioner or designee shall provide notice to the institution
regarding the results of the review and if penalties are warranted. (8/15)
If penalties have been prescribed, the institution shall have 24 hours to respond and provide any additional information, including feedback on whether the matter should be handled as public or private.
If the institution provides additional information, the Commissioner shall review and provide the institution with notice of the final penalties in a timely manner. (8/15)
If the Commissioner determines that a public announcement is warranted, the release shall be provided to the institution for its review prior to release. The announcement shall report the misconduct,
resulting penalties, and any additional references or quotes the Commissioner deems necessary to
properly address the misconduct. (8/15)
The institution may submit feedback regarding the announcement in a timely manner, with the understanding that the Commissioner shall have sole control over the final language and timing of the
release. (8/15)
(2) Commissioner’s Action Final.
The actions of the Commissioner in such cases shall be final and binding, but shall be reported to the
Council in writing for informational purposes. (6/91, 6/96, 6/02, 8/13, 6/17)
b. Timely Action.
In cases where immediate action is not required, but where the Commissioner believes it is in the best interest of the Conference that action be taken to handle incidents of misconduct, the Commissioner may do so.
(6/91, 6/96)
(1) Appeal of Commissioner’s Action.
If the penalty imposed by the Commissioner acting in accordance with these Timely Action procedures consists of more than a reprimand, an institution may appeal the penalty to the Compliance
and Enforcement Committee. The Commissioner shall set both a timely date by which the involved
institution(s) must provide notice that it will make such an appeal and a timely date for a hearing of
the appeal by the Compliance and Enforcement Committee. Any appeal shall be based solely on the
record, shall accept the factual findings of the Commissioner, and shall be devoted to a determination
of whether the penalty in place is excessive, and, if so, what the appropriate penalty should be. One of
the institution’s representatives to the Council must participate in the Compliance and Enforcement
Committee hearing. The decision by the Compliance and Enforcement Committee shall be final and
binding, and shall be reported subsequently to the Council. (6/91, 6/96)
c. Referred Action.
At his/her option, the Commissioner may elect to refer any matter of misconduct to the Compliance and
Enforcement Committee. The Conference’s normal compliance procedure shall be utilized in this event.
(6/87, 6/96)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 48

CER 4-4-d

SupportofConferencePrograms,StandardsofConduct,ActionbyCommissioner

CER 4-5

d. Penalties.
The Commissioner may issue any penalty as provided herein to any personnel found to have violated these
regulations pertaining to misconduct. (6/96, 6/17)
(1) Reprimand.
The Commissioner may issue a private or public reprimand to Conference personnel he/she finds has
violated these regulations pertaining to misconduct. Each public reprimand will be reported in writing
to the Council. Reprimands are final and binding, and are not subject to appeal. (12/92, 6/96, 8/13,
6/17)
(2) Fine.
When misconduct warrants more than a reprimand, the Commissioner is authorized to issue a fine
to be paid by the involved individual(s) within a designated timeframe. Fines assessed to individuals
may not be paid or reimbursed by member institutions. Fines collected by the Conference shall be designated as postgraduate scholarship funds. (6/17)
(3) Probation, Suspension and Other Penalties.
When misconduct warrants more than a reprimand and/or fine, grounds for an exception to the provisions of CER 2 shall exist. In such event, the Commissioner is authorized to assess penalties including,
but not limited to, probationary status and disqualification to coach, participate, or officiate in one or
more contests, or other appropriate penalty. (12/92, 6/96, 6/17)
In any instance when a penalty of probation or suspension is to be assessed against a coach, studentathlete, or other institutional representative, the Commissioner shall not take action directly against the
individual, but will direct the appropriate institutional representative to take such action. As soon as
is reasonably possible following directing such action, and within 72 hours under any circumstances,
the Commissioner shall submit to the Compliance and Enforcement Committee and the affected institutions a full report of the circumstances which prompted the action and the steps that were taken. If
not appealed, the matter subsequently shall be reported to the Council. (8/76, 8/84, 8/85, 6/96, 8/13)
c. Use of Filmed or Videotaped Replays.
The Commissioner may use all evidence available, including filmed or videotaped replays of fighting or
other incidents of misconduct, as a basis for obtaining information, determining facts, or assessing penalties. In the sports of men’s and women’s basketball, when game officials have declared that a fight has
occurred, the Commissioner shall review filmed or videotaped replays to determine whether additional
penalties should be assessed. (6/91, 6/96)
5. Support of Officiating.
Support of officiating is required by the Conference and bolstered by a specific program of positive actions. To
prevent actions by coaches and student-athletes to incite unsportsmanlike conduct on the part of the spectators,
the following steps are to be taken: (6/96)
a. The public address announcer at each contest is to be instructed to make an announcement prior to the
contest reminding the spectators that the visiting team is their guest and the spectators should exemplify
good sportsmanship (see AR 3-10-b). (6/96)
b. The Commissioner is encouraged to ensure that the number of assignments that an official receives
involving a given team is not excessive. (6/96)
c.

Coaches shall assist in crowd control at all times. (6/96)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 49

Sportsmanship

CER 4-5

CER 5-4

d. The Directors of Athletics and Senior Woman Administrators shall actively support the Conference officiating program at all times. (6/96)
e. The Directors of Athletics and Senior Woman Administrators are to take all steps necessary to eliminate
unsportsmanlike conduct by coaches and spectators. (6/96)
f. The Director of Athletics of the host institution shall direct a letter to the Director of Athletics of the
visiting institution if any unsportsmanlike action of coaches or student-athletes merits it. (6/96)

CHAPTER 5—SPORTSMANSHIP
1. Statement.
The Constitution of the Conference cites as a purpose of the Conference that its members shall participate in its
athletics program on the basis of mutual trust and confidence and based upon high standards, scholarship, and
sportsmanship. It adds that the members value quality competitive opportunities for student-athletes, compliance with the rules of fair play, and sportsmanship. (8/94)
Understanding that realization of those goals requires that opponents respect each other and admire earnest
effort made fairly in pursuit of victory, the Conference shall require adherence to the standards it has adopted
or which are set forth in the respective playing rules. It will require ethical conduct worthy of the educational
stature and the standards of its member institutions. (8/94)
While victory shall be the expected goal of every competitor, defeat is not a disgrace, and the prospect of defeat
is never an excuse for unethical behavior or a lack of sportsmanship. (8/94)
Adherence to these principles will maximize the benefits and enjoyment of intercollegiate competition for all—
participants, coaches, and spectators. (8/94)
2. Role of Pac-12 Board of Directors.
The Board of Directors have directed that all representatives of the Conference’s member institutions shall
exhibit ethical behavior at each Conference competition and conduct themselves in accordance with the rules
of the NCAA and the Conference and the playing rules of the respective sports. They have directed that each
member shall create a healthy environment for competition, free of a hostile atmosphere for opponents. This
responsibility is to be shared by administrators, coaches, and student-athletes, plus others involved in intercollegiate athletics in the Conference. (8/94)
They have directed the Commissioner, coordinators of officiating, and game officials to apply the playing rules
tightly and assess appropriate penalties—not merely issue warnings—when violations occur. (8/94)
3. Role of Athletics Administrators.
Athletics administrators, led by the director of athletics, must communicate the expectation of good sportsmanship to all representatives of the institution active in intercollegiate athletics. It is particularly imperative that
this message is impressed on each coach, along with the intention that the coach will require compliance with
the Sportsmanship Statement by each member of the team. The director must ensure that opponents are treated
with fairness and respect. All aspects of game management must be controlled to assure such treatment, including crowd behavior. (8/94)
4. Role of Coaches.
The coach’s behavior influences that of the student-athletes and, frequently, the fans. The coach has a responsibility to educate student-athletes concerning their obligations to the coach, the institution, intercollegiate
athletics, and themselves. Respect for an opponent can most effectively be conveyed to the student-athletes by
the manner in which the coach speaks of and act toward the opponent. (8/94)
2022-23 Handbook • Page 50

CER 5-5

Sportsmanship

CER 5-10

5. Role of Student-Athletes.
Student-athletes must honor the responsibilities which accompany the privilege of representing a Conference
institution by adhering to Conference and playing rules, and the Sportsmanship Statement. Student-athletes
are expected to treat opponents with respect. They must be aware significant penalties will be applied for fighting, taunting an opponent, or other unethical conduct. (8/94)
6. Role of Public Address Announcer.
Each public address announcer should provide an impartial and evenhanded report of the event. Partisanship
in this area inflames emotions and can promote poor sportsmanship by participants and spectators. (8/94)
7. Role of Spirit Groups and Bands.
Like the student-athletes, members of spirit groups and bands are highly visible representatives of Conference
institutions. They can influence the behavior of others. Each spirit group should welcome its counterpart group,
and demonstrate respect for its members. Likewise, it should convey respect for each opponent student-athlete
and team. (8/94)
8. Role of Officials.
Although each game official has a demanding and difficult job to officiate the contest, he/she also will be directed to apply without hesitation or reservation the rules governing conduct and sportsmanship during each
Conference competition. When doing so as directed, the official will have the support of the Conference, each
member institution, and its administrators and coaches. (8/94)
9. Role of Spectators
Fans attending Pac-12 athletic events, including competitions and ancillary activities, are expected to act in line
with the conference’s value-based goals, including protecting the well-being of student-athletes, promoting a
culture of diversity, equity, belonging and inclusivity, and adhering to the highest standards of ethical conduct
and sportsmanship. This includes basic respect toward student-athletes, coaches, officials, event staff, other
fans and any other individuals in attendance at conference athletic events and activities. The Pac-12 Conference
does not condone hate speech, racism, sexism, homophobia, xenophobia or ableism. Further, the Pac-12 Conference strongly discourages abusive or unreasonably disruptive behavior, including but not limited to throwing
objects, using abusive, hostile or threatening language, or making obscene gestures. Pac-12 conference institutions are expected, at a minimum, to establish frameworks and operations for Pac-12 events that uphold and
achieve the Pac-12’s value-based goals in accordance with their own institutional policies as well as all relevant
laws and regulations. (8/21)
10. Institutional Security Plan.
Each institution is required to have a security plan to prevent and manage rushing of the court and field in the
sports of men’s basketball and football. See men’s basketball and football sports policies and regulations for
information about the requirements and penalties for failure to prevent court/field-rushing activities. (8/15,
8/16)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 51

2022-23 Handbook • Page 52

ADMINISTRATIVE
REGULATIONS
AR

Subject

Page

Chapter 1—Committee Structure........................................................................................... 54
Chapter 2—Radio and Television Policies. ........................................................................... 63
Chapter 3—Administrative Policies....................................................................................... 66
Chapter 4—Conference Championships............................................................................... 75
Chapter 5—The Rose Bowl...................................................................................................... 77
Chapter 6—Officiating............................................................................................................. 81
Chapter 7—External Communications, Political Activities, Government Relations...... 90
Chapter 8—Initiation and Review of Proposed NCAA Legislation.................................. 92
Chapter 9—Expense Reimbursement.................................................................................... 93

2022-23 Handbook • Page 53

AR 1-1

Committee Structure

AR 1-1-e

CHAPTER 1—COMMITTEE STRUCTURE
1. General Policies.
a. Agenda.
All agenda items for a regular Council or committee meeting shall be submitted to the Commissioner at
least four weeks in advance of the meeting. They must be fully described when submitted. Agenda items
for special meetings shall be submitted to the Commissioner in time to be included with the meeting notice
or treated under AR 1-1-a-(1) below. The Commissioner, in consultation with the President or Committee
Chair, shall set the agenda. (8/85, 8/10)
(1) Alteration of Agenda.
Additions or changes to the meeting agenda shall be permitted by unanimous consent at the start of
a meeting. If an objection to an addition or change is raised, a two-thirds vote is required to make the
addition or change. (12/83, 6/94, 8/10)
(2) Amendments Required in Writing.
Any proposal to alter the Constitution, and Bylaws, Executive Regulations, or Administrative Regulations of the Conference shall not be acted upon by the Council unless the specific language of the proposal has been presented to the Council in writing no less than 24 hours prior to the proposed action.
Amendments to a proposal are not subject to the 24-hour requirement, provided such amendments are
within the general scope of the proposal as originally presented. However, the 24-hour requirement
shall apply to any such amendment if representatives of four member institutions so demand. (12/83,
8/10)
(3) Classification of Agenda Items.
Items forwarded for action shall be classified into three groups: a consent package of action items, action items for separate consideration, and information items. Any Council or committee member may
request that an item be removed from the consent package for separate consideration. No discussion of
items remaining in the consent package shall be permitted, and a single vote shall be taken on all items
remaining in the consent package. (6/90, 8/10)
b. Appointments.
Unless otherwise specified, the Nominating Committee shall make all appointments to Conference committees, including designating committee chairs. (8/10)
c. Communications.
Any and all communications or inquiries by or on behalf of a committee shall be made by the committee as
a whole through its chair or other designee, and not by individual committee members. (8/10)
d. Meetings.
A Conference committee shall meet as often as necessary to carry out its responsibilities. Any Committee
member may request the chair of a committee to call a meeting. The chair of a committee shall report on
committee meetings on a regular basis to either the Council or the appropriate administrative committee.
(8/10)
e. Membership Terms.
Unless otherwise specified, terms of all committee members shall be three years in length and shall commence on July 1. (8/10)
2022-23 Handbook • Page 54

Committee Structure

AR 1-1-f
f.

AR 1-2-b-(2)-(a)

Procedures.

A committee shall fix its own rules and procedures, which shall be consistent with the policies of the Conference. (8/10)
2. Council Committees.
Committees of the Council shall be divided into two major groups, structural committees (groups identified
by the responsibilities their members have in common) and standing committees (groups identified to perform
particular responsibilities). The Council may appoint ad hoc committees when deemed necessary. (6/90, 6/03,
8/10, 7/20)
a. Structural Committees.
The Faculty Athletics Representatives Committee, the Athletics Directors Committee, the Senior Woman
Administrators Committee, and the Student-Athlete Leadership Team (SALT) shall be denoted as structural committees. The following committees shall function as subcommittees of the structural committees:
(6/90, 2/00, 8/16)
(1) Bowls Subcommittee.
(a) Purpose.
There shall be a Bowls Subcommittee which shall be a committee of the Athletics Directors Committee responsible for reviewing and recommending post-season football bowl game alignments
and policies and procedures related to the administration of the Conference’s bowl agreements.
(b) Composition.
The Committee shall consist of five members. Committee members shall serve a three-year term,
with no more than two members being appointed annually. (10/10)
b. Council Standing Committees.
(1) Membership.
Each standing committee of the Council shall contain at least one member of the Faculty Athletics
Representatives Committee, the Athletics Directors Committee, and the Senior Woman Administrators
Committee. To the degree possible, a Council member shall serve on no more than one standing committee of the Council. (6/90)
(2) Names and Duties.
The following committees shall function as standing committees of the Council and shall have the following duties: (6/90)
(a) Budget and Finance Committee.
i.

Purpose.

The Committee shall assist the Council in fulfilling its responsibility to assist the Pac-12 Board
of Directors with the annual financial review and budgeting process of the Conference. (8/10)
ii. Composition.
The Committee shall consist of six members consisting of two members of the Faculty Athletics Representatives Committee, two members of the Athletics Directors Committee, and two
members of the Senior Woman Administrators Committee. Committee members shall serve
three-year terms, with two members appointed annually. (8/10).
2022-23 Handbook • Page 55

Committee Structure

AR 1-2-b-(2)-(b)

AR 1-2-b-2-(c)

(b) Compliance and Enforcement Committee.
i.

Purpose.

It shall be the duty of the Committee to determine whether alleged violations of Conference
rules have occurred, and to recommend penalties and corrective actions to the Council. The
Committee may also serve as an appellate body as specified in the compliance and enforcement regulations. Special meetings of the Committee may be held on call by the Committee
chair or the Commissioner. (6/89, 6/98, 12/00, 6/01, 6/03, 6/10, 8/10, 10/11, 8/13, 7/20)
ii. Composition.
The Committee shall consist of four members consisting of two members of the Faculty Athletics Representatives Committee who shall serve four-year terms, one member of the Athletics
Directors Committee who shall serve a two-year term, and one member of the Senior Woman
Administrators Committee who shall serve a two-year term. Two or more members of the
same institution shall not serve simultaneously on the Committee. The chair of the Nominating Committee is empowered to appoint new members from the Council if necessary to fill
out terms of members who cannot complete them, or interim members as required by circumstances. In the event the institution of a member of the Committee is involved in an alleged
violation, the member shall be excused from service on the Committee with respect to that case
and an interim member from another institution may be appointed from the Council to serve
on the Committee during consideration and disposition of that case. To the extent possible, the
Nominating Committee shall make appointments to the Committee so as to rotate representation on the Committee among member institutions. The faculty athletics representative with
the longest committee tenure shall serve as chair. An Associate Commissioner shall serve as
secretary. (12/85, 6/89, 6/98, 8/10, 7/20)
(c) Gender Equity Committee.
i.

Purpose.

The Gender Equity Committee shall be a standing committee of the Council that serves in an
advisory capacity to ensure member institutions abide by the committee’s key principles, as
follows. (7/22)
• Equitable Student-Athlete Experience
• Intentional Equity Among Men’s and Women’s Sports Teams and Programs
• Intentional Equity for all Conference Efforts (e.g., operations, staffing, budget)
• Maintain System of Accountability
ii. Composition.
The members of the Committee shall consist of three athletic directors, two faculty athletics
representatives, two senior woman administrators, and four student-athletes from member
institutions. Terms shall be two years per the following rotation schedule. (7/22)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 56

Committee Structure

AR 1-2-b-2-(c)-(iii)

AR 1-2-b-2-(d)-(ii)

iii. Rotation Schedule.
2022-23

2023-24

2024-25

ARIZ

AD

FAR

FAR

CAL

SWA

ASU
CO

ORE

OSU

STAN
UT

WASH
WSU

AD

FAR

SWA

FAR

SWA

SWA
AD

AD

FAR

AD

FAR

SWA
SWA
AD

2025-26
FAR
AD

SWA

2026-27

2027-28

SWA

SWA

FAR
AD

AD

AD

AD

FAR

FAR

SWA

SWA
AD

FAR
FAR

SWA

(d) ImPACt Leadership Council.
i.

Purpose.

The ImPACt Leadership Council shall be a standing committee of the Council that serves in
an advisory capacity to the Pac-12 Pac-12 Board of Directors, Council and Commissioner. The
committee’s work is part of “Pac-12 ImPACt,” the social activism and antiracism arm of the
Conference. The purpose of the committee is to build awareness, identify solutions, and provide leadership in the fight against the systems of racism, exclusion, hate and discrimination.
(10/08, 8/10, 11/16, 8/21)
ii. Composition.
The members of the Committee shall consist of three athletic directors, three faculty athletics representatives, three senior woman administrators, and four student-athletes from member institutions. Terms shall be four years and staggered via the following rotation schedule.
(10/08, 8/10, 11/16, 7/20)
iii. Rotation Schedule.

2022-23 Handbook • Page 57

Committee Structure

AR 1-2-b-2-(d)-(iii)

AR 1-2-b-(2)-(e)-(I)

2020-21

2021-22

2022-23

2023-24

2024-25

2025-26

ARIZ

AD

AD

FAR

FAR

FAR

FAR

CO

SWA

SWA

AD

AD

AD

AD

ASU
CAL

ORE

OSU

STAN

UCLA
USC
UT

WASH
WSU

FAR

FAR

AD

AD

SWA

SWA

FAR

FAR

AD

AD

SWA

SWA

FAR

FAR

SWA

SWA

FAR

FAR

AD

AD

SWA
AD

SWA
FAR
AD

SWA

SWA
FAR
AD

SWA
AD

SWA

FAR

FAR

SWA

SWA

FAR

FAR

AD

AD

SWA
FAR
AD

SWA
FAR
AD

SWA

SWA
FAR
AD

SWA
FAR
AD

SWA
FAR
AD

SWA
AD

SWA
FAR

2026-27

2027-28

2028-29

2029-30

2030-31

2031-32

ARIZ

FAR

SWA

SWA

SWA

SWA

AD

CO

AD

FAR

FAR

FAR

FAR

SWA

ASU
CAL

ORE

OSU

STAN

UCLA
USC
UT

WASH
WSU

SWA

AD

FAR

SWA

AD

FAR

SWA

AD

FAR

FAR

AD

AD

SWA

SWA

AD

AD

SWA

SWA

FAR

FAR

AD

SWA
FAR
AD

SWA
FAR

AD

SWA
FAR
AD

SWA

AD

AD

SWA
FAR

FAR
AD

FAR
AD

SWA

AD

SWA
FAR
AD

SWA
FAR
AD

FAR
AD

SWA

FAR
AD

SWA
FAR

SWA
FAR
AD

FAR
AD

SWA

(10/08, 8/10, 11/16, 8/20)
(e) Council Executive Committee.
i.

Purpose.

The Council Executive Committee shall act on behalf of the Council in the intervals between
meetings of the Council. The Committee shall serve as the integrating and coordinating body
to assure all other committees are fulfilling their functions. The Committee is authorized to
act on behalf of the Council or its structural committees between meetings when timeliness of
action is required. The Committee shall, when requested by the Commissioner, consult with
and provide guidance and counsel to the Commissioner about Conference policy, strategy,
business, and other important issues between Conference meetings. With the Commissioner,
it shall set an appropriate agenda for the Council. All actions by the Committee are subject to
review by the Council. (8/81, 12/85, 6/90, 6/05, 6/07, 10/07, 6/09, 8/10, 7/20)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 58

Committee Structure

AR 1-2-b-2-(e)-(II)

AR 1-2-b-(2)-(f)

ii. Composition.
The members of the Committee shall consist of the present and incoming officers of the Council and the Commissioner, (who shall serve as a an ex officio, non-voting member). The President of the Council shall serve as the chair of the Committee. (8/81, 12/85, 6/90, 6/05, 6/07,
3/09, 8/10)
(f) Legislative Committee.
i.

Purpose:

The Committee shall oversee and manage the NCAA legislative process on behalf of the Conference. Specifically, the Committee shall: (8/10)
(a) Review the merits of suggested legislative recommendations that originate from the
Conference’s coaches and/or administrative committees. (6/10)
(b) Review the merits of NCAA legislative proposals, amendments, and modifications to
determine the feasibility, ramifications, and necessity of each. When appropriate, Committee members should consult with different athletics department and/or institutional constituencies on their campuses who may have relevant expertise with respect to particular
NCAA legislative proposals. (6/10)
(c) Report to the Council a recommended position and/or a comment with respect to each
NCAA legislative proposal, amendment, and modification. The Council may accept or reconsider any of the positions offered by the Legislative Committee. The Council’s decision
shall represent the Conference’s position with respect to these proposals. (6/10)
ii. Composition.
The Committee shall consist of twelve members, one from each member institution, consisting
of a minimum of four reserved positions (one member of the Faculty Athletics Representatives Committee, one member of the Athletics Directors Committee, one member of the Senior Woman Administrators Committee, and one compliance director), eight at-large members
with requisite knowledge of and interest in NCAA legislation, and two Student-Athlete Leadership Team members. The four reserved positions shall rotate among the member institutions
pursuant to a staggered rotation schedule. Terms of the reserved positions shall be one year;
terms for the at-large positions shall be two years. Committee members may be reappointed.
(2/98, 3/08, 6/08, 6/10, 6/11, 12/14, 7/19)
iii. Rotation Schedule.
2020-21

2021-22

2022-23

2023-24

2024-25

2025-26

ARIZ

AL

AL

FAR

AL

AL

SWA

CAL

AL

AL

SWA

AL

AL

CD

ASU
CO

ORE

OSU

STAN

UCLA
USC
UT

SWA
AD
AL

AL

AL

AL

FAR
CD

AL

AL

AD
CD

FAR

SWA
AL

AL

AL

AL

AL

AL

AL

AL

CD
FAR
AL

AL

AL

AL

AL

2022-23 Handbook • Page 59

AL

SWA
AD

AL

AL

FAR
AD

SWA
CD
AL

AL

AL

AL

AL

AL

AL

AL

AL

AL

Committee Structure

AR 1-2-b-(2)-(f)
WASH

AR 1-2-b-(2)-(h)-(iI)

AL

AL

CD

AL

AL

AD

2026-27

2027-28

2028-29

2029-30

2030-31

2031-32

ARIZ

AL

AL

CD

AL

AL

AD

CAL

AL

AL

AD

AL

AL

FAR

WSU

ASU
CO

ORE

OSU

STAN

UCLA
USC
UT

WASH
WSU

AL

AL

AD

AL

SWA

AL

AL

SWA

AL

FAR

AL

CD

AL

AD

CD

AL

FAR

AL

AL

AL

AL

AL

AD

AL

AL

AL

AL

AL

AL

AL

FAR
CD
AL

AL

AL

AL

AL

FAR

SWA

AL

AD

SWA
AL

AL

AL

AL

AL

CD

SWA
AD

FAR
AL

AL

AL

AL

FAR

AL

AL

AL

AL

AL

AL

AL

AL

SWA
CD

(6/11)
(g) NCAA Woman of the Year Nominating Committee.
i.

Purpose:

The Committee shall select the Conference nominee for NCAA Woman of the Year. (10/06,
8/10)
II. Composition:
The Committee shall consist of five members consisting of one member of the Faculty Athletics
Representatives Committee, one member of the Athletics Directors Committee, two members
of the Senior Woman Administrators Committee, and one Conference staff member. Committee members shall serve a two-year term, with two members being appointed annually. (10/06,
8/10)
(h) Nominating Committee.
i.

Purpose.

To identify and recommend to the Council qualified nominations and/or appointments to
serve as NCAA representatives, members of Council committees, Conference sport liaisons,
and Conference representative to the Mountain Pacific Sports Federation. The Committee shall
consider a candidate’s knowledge of college athletics and whether the nominee possesses personal and professional integrity, has good judgment and relevant experience, and will be an
effective representative of the Conference. (2/98, 6/98, 8/10, 7/20)
ii. Composition.
The Committee shall be comprised of six members, two from each structural committee of
the Council. Each Committee member shall serve a two-year term, and the terms of commit-

2022-23 Handbook • Page 60

AR 1 2-b-(2)-(h)-(ii)

Committee Structure

AR 1-2-b-(2)-(h)-(iv)

tee members shall be staggered so each year one faculty athletics representative, one senior
woman administrator, and one athletics director concludes his or her term. (8/10) (2/98, 6/98,
8/10, 7/20)
iii. Nomination Committee Guidelines.
The Committee shall use the following guidelines in determining nominees and appointments:
(6/98, 8/10)
(a) Balance in the number of appointments among individuals and member institutions
is desirable on all committees. When balance is considered, some additional weighting
should be given to certain assignments because of demands on the time of those serving.
(6/98)
(b) Assignments to NCAA governance bodies and committees should be included in computing the positions held for each Council member. (6/98, 3/08)
(c) Except on rare occasions, only one representative of a single institution should serve
on any one committee. (6/98)
(d) To the fullest extent possible, three years should have passed before an individual
again serves on a committee after serving a full term. This shall apply to an individual, not
to a position at an institution. (6/98)
(e) Criteria used for selection should include under-represented minority availability,
positional, regional, and institutional diversity, prior administrative experience, areas of
expertise and knowledge of the Conference. (6/98, 8/10, 7/20)
(f) If a Committee vote is tied for two or more candidates, the Committee chair shall have
the authority to determine the candidate for appointment to the respective body. If the
Committee chair is unavailable, or must abstain, the Commissioner shall have the authority to determine the candidate for appointment to the respective body. (6/07, 8/10)
iv. Parameters for NCAA Selections
(a) Allocation of Position.
The Conference’s representatives on NCAA governance bodies may be members of the
Conference Council or office staff. Neither a rotation system, nor reserved positions shall
be created for specific Council member representation on NCAA governance bodies.
(12/96, 1/97, 2/98, 6/98, 10/01, 3/08, 12/14, 8/15, 7/20)
(b) Alternate Representative.
The alternate representative to the NCAA governance bodies shall be the Commissioner or
the Commissioner’s designee. (12/96, 10/01, 3/08)
(c) Nomination Priorities.
In making the NCAA governance body nominations, it shall be a priority to involve a maximum number of Conference institutions in the NCAA governance process. To the extent
possible, in light of the interaction which will occur with other conferences in the process
of making the nominations, balance in representation within the NCAA governance process shall be sought. (12/96, 1/97, 3/08, 8/10, 12/14)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 61

AR 1-2-b-(2)-(h)-(iv)

Committee Structure

AR 1-2-c-(1)

(d) NCAA Diversity Exception.
It is acknowledged that if diversity is not achieved from the overall nominations within Division I and the FBS conferences, the Conference might be requested by the NCAA Board
of Directors to diversify its representatives from among other Council members. (12/96,
1/97, 8/10)
(e) Institutional Representation
No member shall be represented by more than two individuals on NCAA governance bodies unless it is necessary for reasons of achieving diversity by the NCAA Board of Directors. (1/97, 3/08, 8/10, 12/14)
(i) SAAC Advisory Committee.
i.

Purpose.

The Committee shall be charged with the planning and management of the Conference’s
Student-Athlete Forum and oversight of the Student-Athlete Advisory Committee. (6/98,
6/02, 8/10)
ii. Composition.
The Committee shall consist of five members consisting of one member of the faculty Athletics
Representatives Committee, one member of the Athletics Directors Committee, one member
of the Senior Woman Administrators Committee, one individual with experience in the area of
student-athlete life skills, and one individual with experience in the area of compliance. Committee members shall serve a three-year term, with two members being appointed annually.
(6/98, 6/02, 8/10)
(j) Student-Athlete Health and Well-Being Board.
i.

Purpose.

The SAHWB Board shall be charged with the planning and management of the annual Pac12 Student-Athlete Health Conference and the Pac-12 Student Health and Well-Being Grant
Program. (10/12, 6/18)
ii. Composition.
The Board shall have 12 members consisting of one representative from each member institution and one Conference staff member. (10/12, 6/18)
c. Special Committees.
The following committees will serve as special committees of the Council.
(1) Rose Bowl Management Committee.
i.

Purpose.

Committee shall be charged with year-round management of the Rose Bowl game. (6/90,
8/10)
ii. Composition.
The committee shall consist of the following: (6/90, 8/10)
(a) Four representatives of the Tournament of Roses including the chair of its the Tournament of Roses Football Committee, who shall be serve as chair of the Committee. (6/92,
8/10)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 62

Radio and Television Policies

AR 1-2-c-(1)-(ii)

AR 2-1

(b) Two representatives of the Pac-12 Conference, the Commissioner and the acting chair
of the Athletics Directors Committee. (6/92, 6/94, 8/10, 7/22)
(c) Two representatives of the Big Ten Conference, (6/92, 8/10)
(d) The preceding and incoming chairs of the Athletics Directors Committee of the Pac-12
Conference, as well as the chair of the Athletics Directors Committee and the commissioner of the Big Ten Conference, who shall be ex officio members without vote. (6/61, 5/81,
8/87, 7/88, 8/10, 6/11, 7/22)
(2) Student-Athlete Advisory Committee.
i.

Purpose.

The Committee shall be charged with enhancing the total student-athlete experience. Among
its duties are actively contributing in the development and understanding of NCAA and Conference legislation, facilitating communication between the student-athlete advisory committees of Conference member institutions and that of the NCAA, and participating in community
service activities. (10/01, 8/10)
ii. Composition.
Each Conference member institution shall designate four representatives to serve on the committee, two male and two female. Each member institution shall designate two of its representatives to serve as voting members of the Committee. Committee members shall serve a twoyear term, may serve more than one term, and may serve up to a year beyond the completion
of their athletics eligibility. The Conference’s representative to the NCAA Student-Athlete Advisory Committee shall be an ex officio member of the Committee if he or she is not designated
as an institutional representative. (10/01, 8/10)
3. Chair of Sports Group.
The chair of the football and men’s basketball sports groups annually shall be the Director of Athletics assigned
as liaison to the respective sport. The chair of all other sport groups shall be a senior woman administrator,
as appointed by the Nominating Committee. The term of office for each sports group chair shall begin July 1.
(12/76, 9/85, 12/85, 6/93, 6/02, 6/05, 8/10, 8/16)
4. Meetings of Conference Groups.
Meetings of Conference groups, other than the Board of Directors, Council, Faculty Athletics Representatives
Committee, and the Administrative Committees and their subcommittees, must receive the prior approval of
the appropriate Administrative Committee. The agenda for each such meeting must be circulated to all members of the two Administrative Committees at least one week in advance of the meeting and minutes for each
meeting must be completed and circulated within 30 days following the conclusion of the meeting. (5/83, 8/85,
12/85, 6/90, 6/05, 7/20)

CHAPTER 2—RADIO AND TELEVISION POLICIES
Foreword.
The Conference’s television programs are defined in the contracts executed with the Conference’s television
partners and may be found in those documents. (6/03, 7/12)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 63
Updated 7/1/22

Radio and Television Policies

AR 2-1

AR 2-2

1. General Regulations.
a. Provision of Starting Lineups.
A starting line-up, even if tentative, shall be provided to each telecaster and broadcaster at least 30 minutes
prior to the start of each televised or broadcast Conference event by each participating institution. (6/90,
6/91)
b. Starting Time—Football and Basketball.
Each Conference football and basketball game shall start at the announced time. A minor change or accommodation may be made for televised games which are the second games of doubleheaders. The guidelines
to follow to accommodate no more than a five-minute game start time change for television are as follows:
1) the request asking to have the flexibility to move the game start time no more than five minutes must be
made to the host institution’s director of athletics or designee in advance of game day, 2) the day-of-game
request to move the game start time must be made to a game management designee prior to the start of the
pre-game countdown clock (at least 60 minutes in advance for football and at least 60 minutes in advance
for basketball), and 3) both institutions participating in the contest must immediately be notified of the start
time adjustment. (6/03, 8/13)
c. Football Expense Reimbursement.
The Conference shall provide compensation of up to $250,000 for actual incremental game operation expenses to the host institution for hosting a weeknight “special date” football game that was a contractual
obligation of the Conference through its media contracts. (3/85, 12/85, 12/90, 6/94, 6/95, 6/08, 10/12)
2. Television Scheduling Policies.
a. Fall and Winter Sports.
The following parameters shall apply to contests between Conference members in the sports of women’s
basketball, cross country, field hockey, gymnastics, soccer, swimming and diving, women’s volleyball,
men’s water polo, and wrestling. Changes to non-Conference contests shall be handled on a case-by-case
basis. (6/12, 8/12)
(1) Date Changes.
Any date changes that move a weekend (i.e., Friday, Saturday, or Sunday) Conference contest to a
weekday (i.e., Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday) shall adhere to the following limitations:
(6/12)
•

No institution shall have more than one such change for a road contest in a given season. (6/12)

•

No institution shall have more than two such changes for home contests in a given season. (6/12)

Any date changes that move a Friday or Saturday Conference contest to Sunday shall adhere to the
following limitations: (6/12)
•

No institution shall have more than three such changes for road contests in a given season. (6/12)

•

No institution shall have more than three such changes for home contests in a given season. (6/12)

The following Conference contests do not count toward any of the above limitations: (6/12)
•

Any date changes that move a weekday contest to another weekday. (6/12)

•

Any date changes that move a Saturday contest to Friday. (6/12)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 64

Radio and Television Policies

AR 2-2

AR 2-3-b

•

Contests between traditional rivals, with the exception of contests between Colorado and Utah and
between Washington and Washington State. (6/12)

•

Contests that are the only contest of the week for both teams. (6/12)

Participants in “wild card” telecasts shall be determined at least two weeks in advance of the contest.
(6/12)
(2) Site Changes.
The location of contests between traditional rivals may be reversed when facility or home football
game conflicts occur. If the site of one contest between traditional rivals is reversed, then the site for the
other contest between the traditional rivals shall also be reversed. (6/12)
(3) Starting Times.
Starting times for all contests may be adjusted as needed and will commence between 11:00 a.m. and
8:00 p.m. local time, unless otherwise approved by the participating institutions. No contest may begin
at 11:00 a.m. on days classes are in session. (6/12)
b. Football.
See AR 2-1-b and SPR 6-1-c.
c.

Men’s Basketball.

See AR 2-1-b and SPR 2-1-b.
d. Cancellation/Postponement Consultation Policy.
For any contest scheduled for telecast under a Conference television agreement, the Conference office shall
be consulted before the decision is made to cancel or postpone a contest before the contest begins. Conference members shall coordinate with the Conference office any public announcement regarding a contest’s
postponement or cancellation as well as the timing of any announcement. (10/12)
3. Radio Policies.
a. Reciprocity of Rights.
The Conference endorses the principle of reciprocity of origination rights for football radio broadcasts for
the “official station” of the universities involved in games between member institutions and non-Conference opponents. (1/66)
b. Broadcast on Institution’s Football Network.
Stations within Conference flagship markets (i.e., the designated market areas of Seattle, Spokane/Pullman, Eugene/Corvallis/Portland, San Francisco/Oakland/San Jose, Los Angeles, Phoenix, Tucson, Salt
Lake City, Boulder/Denver) wishing to be on a member institution’s football network shall be required
to broadcast all of that institution’s games during that season. An exception would be made if one or two
games were preempted because of other special events (e.g., World Series) or prior programming commitments. Non-English language radio stations are exempt from this provision. (11/81, 11/87, 6/92, 6/03,
6/09, 6/11)
Outside the flagship markets, stations wishing to be on a member institution’s network may be allowed to
carry a partial schedule of games if the following criterion is met: a minimum of six (6) football games are
carried within a football season and the conflict(s) that prevents the station from carrying the full schedule
of games must be the result of a pre-existing contract or a special event(s). (6/09)
2022-23 Handbook • Page 65

AR 2-3-c

Administrative Policies

AR 3-2

c. Broadcast on Institution’s Men’s Basketball Network.
Stations within Conference flagship markets (i.e., the designated market areas of Seattle, Spokane/Pullman, Eugene/Corvallis/Portland, San Francisco/Oakland/San Jose, Los Angeles, Phoenix, Tucson, Salt
Lake City, Boulder/Denver) wishing to be on a member institution’s men’s basketball network shall be required to broadcast 18 of that institution’s games during that season. Non-English language radio stations
are exempt from this provision. (6/92, 6/03, 6/09, 6/11)
Outside the flagship markets, stations wishing to be on a member institution’s network may be allowed to
carry a partial schedule of games if the following criterion is met: a minimum of 18 men’s basketball games
are carried within a men’s basketball season and the conflict that prevents the station from carrying the full
schedule of games must be the result of a pre-existing contract or a special event(s). (6/09)
d. National Radio Broadcast.
Each home team that sells the national radio rights to a football or men’s basketball game must protect each
market in which an affiliate of either the home team or the visiting team is located. (6/92, 6/09)
e. Football Radio Rights.
The visiting institution shall designate its one “official station” which shall be allowed to broadcast Conference football games between member institutions without charge for rights fees. Each additional originating station of the visiting team shall be charged a rights fee to be determined by the host institution, except
that the non-commercial student station of the visiting team shall be charged a rights fee of $100. (10/08,
6/11, 7/12)
f.

Basketball Radio Rights.

The visiting institution shall designate its one “official station” which shall be allowed to broadcast Conference basketball games between member institutions without charge for rights fees. Each additional originating station of the visiting team shall be charged a rights fee to be determined by the host institution,
except that the non-commercial student station of the visiting team shall be charged a rights fee of $50.
4. Conference Championships Broadcast Rights.
The Conference office shall set the television policies for Conference championships. All radio and television
rights to Conference championships shall be owned by the Conference. (6/61, 6/62, 6/03, 7/12)

CHAPTER 3—ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES
1. Waiver of Administrative and Sports Regulations.
Administrative Regulations and Sports Policies Regulations may be waived by the unanimous vote of the
Commissioner, the President of the Council, and Chairs of the Administrative Committees upon determination
by the Commissioner that consideration of a waiver of the applicable rule is merited. Waivers granted under
this section are to be communicated immediately to the Administrative Committees or, when appropriate, the
Council. In the event the action involves a member institution represented by the Council President or Chair
of an Administrative Committee, the preceding Council President or the preceding Administrative Committee
Chair shall be appointed to serve instead. (6/98)
2. Unusual Circumstances.
If problems arise regarding any Conference regular-season competition (e.g., transportation, facility, equipment, officials), the following procedures shall be followed: (10/00)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 66

AR 3-2

Administrative Policies

AR 3-5

a. When the problem is recognized, the appropriate administrative representatives from the participating
athletics departments shall communicate immediately and work toward a mutual agreement.
b. If the athletics administrators from the participating institutions cannot resolve the problem, the Conference office shall be contacted for assistance. Until the Conference office has been notified and a solution
has been achieved, the two teams shall remain at the competitive site. If the matter cannot be adjudicated,
the Commissioner shall rule on the matter with the primary goal to be the maintenance of competitive equity among all Conference members.
c. Under step b, if the Commissioner determines that one of the institutions is at fault or primarily at fault
and an immediate decision is necessary, the Commissioner may direct that it forfeit the contest(s) to its
opponent(s).
d. If an institution’s representatives do not abide by a decision of the Conference Commissioner, such action may be grounds for forfeiture of a contest(s).
e. A written report of the incident shall be submitted to the Conference office within five days by representatives of the participating institutions, subsequent to the resolution of the problem (through steps a and
b). This report shall state all relevant facts pertaining to the incident and the decisions made. The Commissioner shall forward those reports plus his own written report and decision to the appropriate Administrative Committee for review per step f.
f. The forfeiture (declared by the Commissioner) of any contest shall be reviewed by the appropriate
Administrative Committee. (A two-thirds majority vote will be required to reverse the Commissioner’s
decision.) Any apparent violation of Conference regulations shall be referred to the Compliance and Enforcement Committee for its review.
g. Any forfeited contest shall be regarded as a loss for the team making the forfeit and a win for its opponent. (12/86)
If problems arise in Conference championship competition, the Conference staff member present at the event
and representatives of the participating institutions shall confer to determine the course of action to be followed. No team may leave the competitive site until that course of action is identified and communicated to
representatives of all participating institutions. (10/00)
3. Contest Cancellations in Sports Other Than Men’s Basketball and Football
Before a decision is made about cancellation of any scheduled Conference contest, a conference call shall be
conducted with administrative representatives from participating institutions, and the Conference SWA (or
designee). Announcement of the contest cancellation and related details shall be coordinated among the parties
prior to release. (7/19)
4. Expenses for Make-Up Contests.
In sports other than football, men’s and women’s basketball, and women’s volleyball, the Conference office
shall pay the expenses involved for an additional trip to make-up a contest(s) that impacts the determination of
the Conference champion or the Conference automatic qualifier into an NCAA Championship. The Conference
office shall participate in all discussions and decisions concerning the playing of a make-up contest(s) for which
it would be required to pay expenses. (6/88, 12/96)
5. Medical Aid.
A trainer and/or doctor shall be supplied by the host institution at all Conference contests.

2022-23 Handbook • Page 67

Administrative Policies

AR 3-6

AR 3-6-g-(1)

6. Awards.
a. Awards Selection.
Trophies and medals will be selected and procured by the Commissioner.
b. Team Trophies.
Team trophies are presented to the winners of Conference play in baseball, men’s and women’s basketball, women’s gymnastics, women’s lacrosse, men’s and women’s tennis, men’s and women’s soccer, softball, and women’s volleyball, and to the winners of the annual Conference Championship in men’s and
women’s basketball, beach volleyball, and men’s and women’s rowing (and the winner of the men’s and
women’s rowing varsity eight race), men’s and women’s swimming and diving, men’s and women’s tennis, men’s and women’s track and field, and wrestling. (5/78, 6/86, 12/89, 6/93, 6/95, 6/96, 5/97, 8/98,
6/00, 10/08, 10/11, 8/15, 6/17, 7/20)
c. Individual Awards.
Individual awards will be presented on a sport-by-sport basis. (5/78, 6/86, 6/87)
(1) Conference Champions.
The Conference shall provide all eligible members of the Conference champion with an individual
award valued as follows: football, men’s basketball, women’s basketball, women’s volleyball: $325; all
other sports: $70. (6/02, 10/02, 6/11, 10/11)
d. All-Conference Teams.
All-Conference teams will be selected in baseball, men’s and women’s basketball, men’s and women’s
cross country, football, men’s and women’s golf, women’s gymnastics, lacrosse, men’s and women’s rowing, men’s and women’s soccer, softball, men’s and women’s tennis, and women’s volleyball. Conference
telephone calls shall not be used to select all-Conference teams or other Conference awards. (6/86, 12/89,
6/93, 12/93, 6/95, 5/97, 8/98, 6/99, 6/00, 6/17)
e. Tom Hansen Conference Medal.
The Tom Hansen Conference Medal is awarded annually at each member institution to that member’s outstanding senior male and female student-athlete based on the exhibition of the greatest combination of performance and achievement in scholarship, athletics, and leadership. Awards will normally be made prior
to the completion of the academic year at each campus. Announcement of the recipient will be forwarded
immediately to the Conference office. (6/09)
f.

Sportsmanship Award.

The Conference shall present an annual sportsmanship award. (6/04)
g. All-Academic Honors Program.
All student-athletes who have a cumulative grade-point average of 3.3 or higher and have completed
a year in residence at a Pac-12 institution shall be named Pac-12 Conference All-Academic honorees.
Consideration of this award shall be provided to NCAA student-athletes in the Conference. All honorees shall receive a certificate. (6/90, 12/90, 12/91, 6/94, 6/99, 11/16, 6/17, 7/19, 1/20, 7/20)
(1) Selection Criteria.
Institutions shall forward their nominations to the Conference office with the grade-point averages
verified by the Faculty Athletics Representative. (6/90, 12/90, 12/91, 6/94)
2022-23 Handbook • Page 68

AR 3-6-h

Administrative Policies

AR 3-7-e

h. Scholar-Athlete of the Year Award.
A Scholar-Athlete of the Year will be selected annually in each of the Pac-12’s sponsored sports. The nomination criteria are: 1) senior (in athletics eligibility) on track to receive a degree; 2) cumulative grade point
average of 3.0 or higher; 3) participation in at least 50 percent of the scheduled contest in the sport; and 4)
minimum of one year in residence at the institution. Each Pac-12 institution may nominate one individual
per sport, and the winners will be selected by a committee of Pac-12 staff members. The athletic accomplishments of the nominees will be a consideration in the voting for the award. The Scholar-Athletes of the
Year in each sport will receive a commemorative award. (8/13)
i.

Conference Records.

The Conference shall provide, upon request of a member, blank certificates for student-athletes who set a
Conference record. (6/94)
j.

Naming Awards.

Awards may be named after Pac-12 Conference administrators, coaches, faculty, or student-athletes, whether alive or deceased. The individual must have achieved a high level of distinction and service, be widely
recognized in the area in which the award is given and above all, must compare favorably with individuals
identified by existing Pac-12 named awards. All proposals for naming awards are subject to review and
approval by the Pac-12 Council. (7/20)
7. Scheduling.
a. Competition Confirmation.
Host institutions shall issue to visiting institutions a letter of confirmation, including all pertinent details,
for Conference competition in all sports except football and men’s basketball. (10/04)
b. Constitutionally Required Sports.
There shall be formal and continuing schedules involving all member institutions in men’s and women’s
basketball, football, and women’s volleyball. (5/71, 6/86, 12/91, 10/07, 6/12)
c. Conference-Wide Scheduling Requirement.
There shall be formal and continuing schedules involving all member institutions sponsoring the sport
at the varsity level in basketballs, baseball, women’s gymnastics, women’s lacrosse, men’s and women’s
soccer, men’s and women’s tennis, softball, and women’s volleyball. (12/91, 6/93, 6/95, 6/96, 5/97, 8/98,
6/00)
d. Rescheduling Exception.
The Conference staff has the authority to exercise discretion in the application of rescheduling polices in
outdoor sports other than football (see the applicable sports regulation) in cases of weather-related problems, provided that the coaches of the participating teams agree, there is no additional missed class time for
either team, and there is no additional travel cost for the visiting team. (6/05)
e. Schedule Approval.
The initial Conference schedule in each sport for each year shall be adopted by a majority vote of the appropriate administrative committee. (6/12)
All changes in dates of football and men’s basketball games between Conference members must be approved by the Athletics Directors Committee. To maximize future Conference income on a long-term basis
and recognizing national exposure, it shall be the objective of the Athletics Directors Committee to adjust to
2022-23 Handbook • Page 69

AR 3-7-e

Administrative Policies

AR 3-7-g

the extent possible, while respecting the student-athletes’ academic responsibilities, the Conference’s basketball schedule to maximize attractive television opportunities, and in turn, exposure for the Conference’s
basketball programs. (8/69, 6/03, 6/06, 6/12)
In sports other than football and men’s basketball changes made to schedules for television purposes do
not require further approval by the Senior Woman Administrators Committee provided the changes meet
existing parameters and are completed within established deadlines; however, the Senior Woman Administrators Committee shall approve schedule changes when Conference regulations specify contest days or
times. (10/03, 6/12)
f.

Scheduling Conflicts.

The following procedures shall be used to resolve scheduling conflicts in sports where game days and/or
times are specified in the sports regulations, either for single games or series involving two or more Conference member institutions in sports other than football and men’s basketball. (6/04)
(1) Prior to the First Date of Conference Competition for Any Institution.
(a) The institutions involved in the contest(s) attempt to reach agreement between/among themselves.
While this step may be initiated by coaches, often it is helpful if administrative guidance is provided.
All travel partners must be consulted/involved in discussion of a change to any contest of a series. The
administrators from institutions involved in such resolutions shall report the outcome to the appropriate Conference staff member. (6/04)
(b) Should institutional agreement not be reached, the appropriate Conference staff member shall assist the members in the resolution. Assistance shall include information gathering and sharing as well
as individual or collective discussions. One individual at each of the involved institutions shall be
identified to communicate with the Conference office. (6/04)
(c) Should resolution with Conference staff assistance not result in agreement, the appropriate Conference staff member shall consult with other staff members, including the Commissioner, and determine
the date(s) or time of competition. (6/04)
(d) In the sports where Conference regulations establish playing days and/or times (men’s soccer,
women’s soccer, softball, men’s tennis, women’s tennis, volleyball and women’s basketball), the changes identified by the institutions or Conference staff shall be approved by the SWAC as either a specific
change or as part of the approval of the entire schedule. (6/04)
(2) Subsequent to the Playing of Any Conference Contest.
One representative of the institution desiring rescheduling must contact the member of the Conference
staff responsible for the administration of the sport in question. The staff member will contact coaches
and/or administrators of all other institutions involved to gather information and institutional preferences. The Conference staff member, in consultation with other appropriate staff members including
the commissioner, shall make a determination as to whether to reschedule the contest(s) in question
and the date(s) and time(s) to be used for the rescheduled contest(s). The SWAC will be notified of any
such decision. (6/04)
g. Master Schedule.
Member institutions are required to enter team schedules for all sports other than football into the Conference’s online master schedule database. (10/12)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 70

Administrative Policies

AR 3-8

AR 3-9

8. Instructions Regarding Gambling, Pro Contracts.
Each member institution shall carry out its own procedures to inform and instruct its student-athletes on their
responsibilities in protecting themselves and their sports from gambling interests. Each member institution also
shall assume the responsibility of alerting the members of its football squad to refrain from signing professional
contracts or entering into any type of agreement with an agent prior to participation in postseason football
games or expiration of the student’s eligibility for intercollegiate athletics. (6/61, 9/61, 5/78)
9. Regular Season Squad Limits.
Home and travel squads for intra-Conference games or contests shall be limited to the numbers specified in the
following table, except there shall be no limit for the traditional rival games or contests played at the site of one
of the rivals. (1/76, 5/76, 5/79, 5/81, 12/85, 11/86, 12/91, 12/92, 6/94, 12/94, 6/95, 12/95, 2/98, 6/00, 4/01,
6/01, 6/02, 10/03, 6/04, 6/07, 10/07, 6/08, 10/08, 6/09, 10/09, 12/09, 6/10, 10/10, 8/16, 12/17, 12/18, 7/19,
7/20, 8/21, 7/22)
SPORT

MEN

Baseball

27

--

Basketball

16 home/15 away

16 home/15 away

Cross Country
Beach Volleyball

Football

--

WOMEN

--

--

74 away/unlimited home


--

Golf

n/a

n/a

Lacrosse

--

unlimited home/32 away

Gymnastics

Soccer

--

18#

unlimited home/22 away*

unlimited home/22 away**

Swimming & Diving

20 swimmers; 4 divers

20 swimmers; 4 divers@

Outdoor Track


unlimited home/away


unlimited home/away

--

unlimited home/16 away

Softball

Tennis

Volleyball

Wrestling

--


22 home/22 away***

--

In all sports, injured student-athletes shall be included in the squad limit. (6/09, 8/09, 6/1, 7/22)
^—In the sport of baseball, visiting teams may travel up to 30 student-athletes when an institution participates
in conference and non-conference play during the same road trip. If an institution is participating in mutiple
non-conference games during the road trip, they may submit a waiver to the Conference office to increase the
travel roster beyond 30. Only 27 student-athletes designated to compete may participate in the Conference
series. (7/22)
#—In the sport of women’s gymnastics, the host institution may allow the entire squad to participate in the
introduction ceremony. (6/00)
*—In the sport of men’s soccer, except for traditional rival contests, each team shall designate in writing prior
to each contest no more than 22 participants from its squad who may participate in the contest. (6/00, 6/05,
6/08, 6/09, 6/10, 7/22)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 71
Updated 7/1/22

AR 3-9

Administrative Policies

AR 3-11-a

**—In the sport of women’s soccer, except for traditional rival contests, each team shall designate in writing
prior to each contest no more than 22 participants from its squad who may participate in the contest. (6/08,
6/09, 6/10)
***—In the sport of softball, 22 home may include non-dressed SA in dugout. (7/20)
@—In the sport of women’s swimming, Washington State and Utah are considered rival pairs. (12/19)
a. Restrictions.
When a team is operating under a Conference-imposed travel squad limitation, only those individual student-athletes designated as counting within the travel squad limitation shall travel and reside with the
team. A student-athlete who is not on the institution’s traveling squad who wishes to travel to any away
game shall be governed by the following:
(1) The student-athlete may not travel with the team except on regularly scheduled commercial transportation in space available to the general public and when the student-athlete makes his or her own
travel arrangements and purchases the ticket at the regular commercial rate. The prohibition against
traveling with the team applies even if the team travels by charter transportation and sells extra space
to non-team members.
(2) The student-athlete may stay at the team hotel only if he or she makes his or her own lodging accommodations. The student-athlete may not stay in the same room with a member of the official team party.
(3) Once the team has departed the campus, the student-athlete may not participate in any team functions, including but not limited to team meetings and team meals, nor utilize the team’s ground transportation.
(4) The student-athlete may be provided a maximum of four complimentary admissions. Unless prohibited by a sports regulation [e.g., SPR 1-2-f-(2)] he or she may be situated in the participating team’s
area (e.g., sideline, bench). (12/86, 12/92, 6/95)
10. Cheerleading Guidelines.
The Conference has adopted the Recommendations and Guidelines for College Cheerleading Safety published
by the American Association of Cheerleading Coaches and Administrators. (6/98, 8/06, 10/06)
11. Crowd Control Policy.
The Conference has assigned a high priority to assuring its athletics events are conducted in a safe and enjoyable atmosphere. It is the responsibility of the home game management to provide such an environment, and
specifically, to control the actions of the crowd insofar as possible. The home institution shall provide sufficient
game management staff and security personnel to ensure a safe environment. At each athletics event, the home
institution shall identify to game officials and the competing teams an athletics department designee on the
premises as the person in charge of game management at that event. It is the responsibility of the coaches to
control the actions of their student-athletes prior to, during, and after the competitive event. Coaches, studentathletes, and bench personnel shall avoid actions which could incite the crowd during the competitive event.
(12/87)
a. Artificial Noisemakers.
Unless specifically permitted by a separate regulation, artificial noisemakers shall be prohibited at all contests hosted by Conference members. (6/03)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 72

AR 3-11-b

Administrative Policies

AR 3-13

b. Required Announcement.
The following public address announcement shall be read before all contests and, if necessary, during contests:
The Conference has assigned a high priority to assuring its athletics events are conducted in
a safe and enjoyable atmosphere. Spectators are reminded that unruly behavior will result in
immediate ejection from the premises. (6/90)
12. Coaches’ Meetings and Media Days.
a. Attendance.
(1) Basketball and Football.
Each head football coach and each head men’s and women’s basketball coach is required to attend
(a) the spring coaches meeting and spring joint ADC/coaches meeting, and (b) the Conference’s designated media days, not to exceed three days (excluding travel to and from the media days). Failure
to attend any one of the above meetings/events will result in an automatic fine of $10,000. Failure to
attend a second or third event within the same calendar year will result in automatic fines of $20,000
and $30,000, respectively, coupled with a public reprimand. The Commissioner has the authority to
significantly escalate fines if a coach fails to adhere to the above attendance requirements in consecutive years or in circumstances in which a coach is consistently absent or the coach’s absence otherwise
represents a pattern. The Commissioner has the authority to waive the above attendance requirement
in certain limited circumstances. All excused absences must be obtained, in writing, from the Commissioner prior to the event; or if such notice is impossible, as soon as practical thereafter. Fines are not to
be paid or reimbursed by member institutions. (6/91, 12/91, 10/02, 6/03, 6/11)
(2) Sports Other Than Basketball and Football.
Each head coach in sports other than basketball and football is required to attend (a) annual coaches
meetings, and (b) coaches meetings held in conjunction with Conference championships. Attendance
may be excused if (a) an assistant coach attends the meeting as a substitute, and (b) such substitute
attendance has been approved in advance by the Commissioner or the Commissioner’s designee (either on a case-by-case basis or globally with regard to a specific meeting). Failure to attend any one of
the above meetings/events (or failure to send an approved assistant coach) will result in disciplinary
action by the Commissioner and such disciplinary action may include a significant fine. The Commissioner has the authority to significantly escalate any discipline if a coach fails to adhere to the above
attendance requirements in consecutive years or in circumstances in which a coach is consistently absent or the coach’s absence otherwise represents a pattern. Fines are not to be paid or reimbursed by
member institutions. (6/91, 12/91, 10/02, 6/03, 6/11)
b. Administrative Liaisons to Coaches’ Meetings.
Council members shall provide necessary administrative coverage for coaches’ group meetings. Council liaisons to the football and men’s basketball coaches’ groups shall be appointed by the ADC. Council liaisons
in sports other than football and men’s basketball shall be appointed by the Senior Woman Administrators
Committee and shall serve three-year terms. Any NCAA sports committee member shall be included in
his/her respective coaches’ group. (6/90, 2/00, 6/02, 10/03, 6/11, 7/20)
13. Use of Conference Name.
The following procedures and criteria shall be applied to the approval of institutionally-initiated requests for
the use of the Conference name: (12/91)
a.

The event or challenge shall involve Division I programs only. (12/91)
2022-23 Handbook • Page 73

AR 3-13

Administrative Policies

AR 3-15-a

b. At least two Conference institutions must be involved in the event. (12/91)
c. Rules and regulations of the NCAA and the governing body of that particular sport will be utilized.
(12/91)
d. All games/contests will be regulation. (12/91)
e. Institutions must submit a request for the use of the Conference name and all sponsorships must be
approved by the Conference office. (12/91)
f.

If television revenue is generated, the Conference revenue sharing plan will be used. (12/91)

g. Proposals must be submitted to the Conference office prior to the start of the season in which the event
will be contested. (12/91)
h. Upon Conference office approval, the Conference name may be used to promote the event/challenge.
No corporate name may be linked to the Conference name other than to tag ‘Pac-12 ..... Challenge sponsored by .....’” (12/91, 6/11)
14. Sideline Sponsorship Rights.
For all regular-season Conference contests, the visiting institution shall be permitted, within its bench area only,
to exhibit a sponsor’s name/logo or a brand name/logo on team uniforms, staff and coaches clothing, coolers,
cups, towels, cooling fans (brand name only permitted) and coaches’ headsets. No other visual display of sponsors’ names/logos and advertising shall be permitted in the team bench area with the exception of chair back
covers in arena sports (i.e. basketball, volleyball, etc.) placed on the chairs by the home institution. Sponsorship
agreements in existence prior to June 1, 2002, are exempt from this regulation. (6/02)
15. Affiliate Membership.
The term of membership of an affiliate member of the Conference shall be one year. One year written notice,
given by October 1 of that respective year, shall be required for any withdrawal by, or termination of an affiliate
member. (10/12)
Affiliate members shall be eligible to earn the Conference’s automatic qualification for an NCAA Championship. When applicable, assignment of game officials shall be made by the Conference. Coaches and studentathletes of affiliate members shall be eligible for any Conference academic or athletics award. Coaches of affiliate members shall have full voting rights at coaches’ meetings. (10/12)
Compliance and eligibility policies of the affiliate member’s primary conference shall apply. (10/12)
Affiliate members shall not be provided with any Conference-generated revenue or any expense reimbursement. (10/12)
The Conference will control any and all media to any intra-Conference events (home or away) involving a
Conference institution and an affiliate member. An affiliate member may stream home events via its official
athletics website. (10/12)
An affiliate member must receive prior approval for any use of the Conference logo or other Conference marks,
including on jerseys and/or on sports facilities. The Conference marks may be used on printed recruiting materials without restriction, as well as on the affiliate member’s website. (10/12)
a. Host Institution.
Affiliate members may not host a Conference Championship, except in the sport of wrestling. (6/12, 8/21)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 74

Conference Championships

AR 3-15-a-(1)

AR 4-4

1) Wrestling Exception
In the sport of wrestling, affiliate members are permitted to host the Conference Championship. Affiliate members will bear the operating expenses of hosting the championship, but will retain any profits
generated from the event. (8/21)

CHAPTER 4—CONFERENCE CHAMPIONSHIPS
1. Championship Sports.
Conference Championships are determined in the following sports: baseball, men’s and women’s basketball,
beach volleyball, men’s and women’s cross country, football, men’s and women’s golf, women’s gymnastics,
lacrosse, men’s and women’s rowing, men’s and women’s soccer, softball, men’s and women’s swimming and
diving, men’s and women’s tennis, men’s and women’s track and field, women’s volleyball, and wrestling.
(5/75, 3/77, 5/78, 12/85, 7/92, 6/93, 6/95, 5/97, 8/98, 6/00, 6/17)
2. Determination of Champions.
The regular season champions of baseball, men’s and women’s basketball, women’s gymnastics, lacrosse,
men’s and women’s soccer, softball, men’s and women’s tennis, and women’s volleyball are determined by the
Conference standings at the conclusion of regular-season play. The baseball, men’s and women’s cross country,
football, men’s and women’s golf, women’s gymnastics, lacrosse, men’s and women’s rowing, softball, men’s
and women’s swimming and diving, men’s and women’s tennis, men’s and women’s track and field, and wrestling championships are determined by a championship contest, meet or tournament. (5/78, 4/85, 12/85, 6/92,
7/92, 6/93, 6/95, 5/97, 8/98, 6/00, 3/09, 10/10, 8/15, 6/17, 7/20)
3. Automatic Qualification for NCAA Championship.
For sports in which the Conference has been awarded automatic qualification for the NCAA Championship
(see below), should Conference competition be interrupted unexpectedly and the Conference or NCAA policy
for designating the automatic qualifier as set forth in the relevant sport regulation cannot be applied, the administrative committee responsible for administration of the affected sport shall determine the Conference’s
automatic qualifier. (6/94, 12/96, 6/08, 8/21)
Baseball

Men’s Golf

Men’s Soccer

Men’s Tennis

Women’s Basketball

Lacrosse

Softball

Wrestling

Men’s Basketball

Women’s B Volleyball

Women’s Golf
Women’s Rowing

Women’s Soccer
Women’s Tennis

Women’s Volleyball

4. Maximum Effort Rule.
Conference members are expected to compete in Conference championships in sports they sponsor, and coaches are expected to attempt to field their strongest team to compete in single site Conference championships.
Violations of this rule shall be reviewed by the Compliance and Enforcement Committee. (5/84, 12/91)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 75

Conference Championships

AR 4-5

AR 4-7

5. Championships Squad Limits.
The maximum number of competitors a member institution may enter in the various Conference Championships and the Conference basketball tournaments has been established as follows:
CHAMPIONSHIP OR
TOURNAMENT
Baseball

Basketball

MEN
30

15 MBK Tournament

WOMEN

15 WBK Tournament

Cross Country

10 may travel & compete (5 count)

10 may travel & compete (5 count)

Beach Volleyball

--


Football

85 FB Championship Game

Golf


-5

Gymnastics

--


Rowing

--

43

Lacrosse

Softball

Swimming & Diving
Tennis

Track & Field
Wrestling

--

--

32


24 (divers = 1/2)

24 (divers = 1/2)

28

28


15 may travel; 10 may compete


--

There is no requirement that a member institution must enter a minimum number of competitors in a Conference Championship. Unless otherwise specified in the sport regulations, the travel restrictions outlined in AR
3-8-a shall apply to the squad limits at Conference championships. (12/77, 11/79, 5/81, 7/92, 6/94, 12/94, 5/97,
9/98, 6/99, 6/00, 6/01, 10/02, 10/05, 6/07, 6/08, 6/09, 8/09, 6/10, 3/12, 6/17, 12/17, 6/18, 7/19, 7/20)
a. Championship Expense Sharing.
Unless otherwise specified, travel expenses (airfare and ground transportation), event management costs,
and Championship mementos, shall be shared equally by those institutions with an intercollegiate team(s)
participating in the Championship(s). Participating institutions shall be charged or reimbursed on a perperson travel expense cost. The Conference shall invoice each institution for championship expenses for its
student-athletes equivalent to the limits indicated above. Championship expenses for participating institutions will be obtained from the athletics business offices. (12/19)
6. Admission.
Admission shall be charged for all Conference championships if feasible. The host of the championship shall
consult with the Conference championships staff to determine if admission shall be charged, evaluating the
logistics of the championship site, the potential revenue and the costs associated with charging admission.
(11/86, 6/06)
7. Budget.
Equipment purchases may be included when sufficient championships-quality equipment is necessary for the
conduct of the event is not available at the host institution. Approved event management expenses incurred
by the host institution of a permanent site Conference championship may be included in the expense sharing
formula. (12/91, 12/92, 7/20)
2022-23 Handbook • Page 76
Updated 7/1/2021

The Rose Bowl

AR 4-7-a

AR 5-1

a. Distribution of Receipts.
Net proceeds from any Conference Championship shall be divided among the member institutions on a
per-person, per-mile basis for the number of participants competing. (12/60, 6/62, 5/69, 4/78, 5/78, 5/82,
6/90, 6/98, 8/98, 11/07, 6/11, 7/12)
b. Banquets.
No banquet shall be provided at a Conference championship unless sport-specific or banquet sponsorship
has been secured. (6/90)
c. Mementos.
Host institutions shall provide only the participant mementos obtained by the Conference office, which
shall be at the same price point for all Olympic sport Conference championships (see chart below). For all
championships, the cost of mementos shall be deducted on a pro rata basis from the Conference year-end
miscellaneous income distribution.
Football

$350

Men’s Basketball

$350

Women’s Basketball

$350

Gymnastics

$100

Lacrosse

$100

Men’s Cross Country

$100

Men’s Golf

$100

Men’s Rowing

$100

Women’s Cross Country
Women’s Golf

$100

$100

Women’s Rowing

$100

Men’s Swimming & Diving

$100

Women’s Swimming & Diving

$100

Men’s Track & Field

$100

Women’s Track & Field

$100

Men’s Tennis

$100

Beach Volleyball

$100

Women’s Tennis
Wrestling

$100
$100

(6/90, 10/03, 6/05, 6/09, 6/10, 7/20)
8. Club Sports.
A club sport is a sport not recognized as a regular varsity intercollegiate sport, but in which the university sponsors a team and conducts outside competition. Except in the sport of men’s rowing, club teams are not permitted to compete in Conference championships. Rowing teams which compete in the Conference championship
must abide by the Conference rules for rowing championship participation during the regular season. In other
sports, competition against club teams is at the discretion of the institution. (5/74, 5/79, 5/82, 4/85, 8/98, 1/22)
9. Artificial Noisemakers.
Artificial noisemakers are prohibited at all Conference Championships. (6/05)

CHAPTER 5—THE ROSE BOWL
1. Conference Affiliation.
The Conference, through its contract with the Pasadena Tournament of Roses Association, normally shall participate in the Rose Bowl football game, played January 1 each year except when January 1 falls on a Sunday, in
which case the game is played the following day. Such participation shall be subject to the terms and conditions
of the Second Amended and Restated Rose Bowl Agreement between the Conference, the Big Ten Conference,
2022-23 Handbook • Page 77

The Rose Bowl

AR 5-1

AR 5-4-a

Inc., and the Pasadena Tournament of Roses Association, as may be amended from time to time (the “Rose Bowl
Agreement”). (9/98, 8/10)
2. Selection Procedures.
The winner of the Conference Football Championship Game shall represent the Conference in the Rose Bowl.
However, if the winner of the Conference Football Championship Game is ranked No. 1, 2, 3 or 4 in the College Football Playoff (CFP) ranking system then it shall participate in the appropriate College Football Playoff
system game(s). (6/99, 6/03, 8/06, 6/11, 12/13, 8/14)
a. Replacement Team Selection
In any year in which a Conference team that would otherwise be selected to compete in the Rose Bowl
Game is released to play in the College Football Playoff, the Association shall select as its replacement the
highest ranked available team in that Conference per the final College Football Playoff Rankings. (7/22)
However, in the event the highest ranked available team in the Conference is among a cluster of teams in
that Conference, the Association shall, in its sole discretion, select as the replacement team from that cluster
which the Association believes will result in the best possible match-up for that particular Rose Bowl Game.
In making its selection, the Association may take into account such factors as it deems appropriate, including without limitation: (7/22)
1) The last time a team played in the Rose Bowl Game;
2) Head-to-head results; regular season schedule, record and opponents played;
3) Past playoff and/or bowl appearances and performance; and
4) Historical match-ups.
As used in this provision, the following terms are defined as follows:
“Rankings” shall refer to the rankings of the College Football Playoff Selection Committee as of the
date of decision.
A “cluster of teams” shall mean two or more teams in the applicable Conference, all of which are
ranked within six positions of the highest ranked team.
In the rare case that the Pac-12 does not have a team included in the final College Football Rankings, other
than a CFP playoff team, the official SportsSource rankings will be used to determine the Rose Bowl replacement team, and the same “cluster of teams” and factors listed above will be applied in the selection
process. (12/13, 11/14, 7/22)
3. Rose Bowl Management Committee.
The Rose Bowl Management Committee shall be charged with year-round management of the Rose Bowl game
as provided in the Rose Bowl Agreement. (6/61, 5/81, 8/87, 7/88, 6/92, 6/94, 8/10)
4. Expenses and Receipts.
a. Team Expenses.
The member institution participating in the Rose Bowl game shall be provided expenses as set forth in ER
1-3. (11/91, 12/96, 2/99, 8/14)
(1) The transportation allowance shall be the actual transportation costs for charter aircraft or roundtrip bus transportation sufficient to travel the official team party and band between the institution and
bowl game site. (2/99)
2022-23 Handbook • Page 78
Updated 7/1/2021

The Rose Bowl

AR 5-4-a

AR 5-4-d

Reimbursable charter air or bus costs will be determined by the actual expense of round-trip transportation (two one-way trips) on charter aircraft and/or buses up to a maximum of 600 total seats one-way.
The participating institution must submit its charter air/bus bids to the Conference office for approval
of reimbursable charter expenses. There is no additional reimbursement for exceeding the maximum
total number of allowable seats per round-trip from institution to bowl site. Bus transportation for the
official travel party and/or band is reimbursable for travel one-way from the institution to a bowl site
greater than 50 miles. Bus transportation to and from a bowl site in a participating institution’s local
area (within a 50-mile radius of the institution) must be expensed within its allocated bowl expense
budget. (2/99)
All student-athlete air fares to/from home to bowl site (as permissible by NCAA regulations) must be
expensed from the participating institution’s allocated bowl expense budget. (2/99)
A combination expense allowance for round-trip charter aircraft and bus transportation costs may be
permitted if the permissible travel party does not exceed the maximum of 600 charter air/bus seats
permitted for the Rose Bowl game. (2/99)
In no case shall the total expense (transportation allowance plus expense budget) exceed the actual
game payout. (11/91, 6/92, 6/95, 2/98, 2/99)
b. Conference Expenses.
Conference expenses deducted from the Conference’s share of net income prior to distribution include
institutional representatives’ expenses, Commissioner’s expenses, expenses for staff coordinating the institutional representatives’ visit, tickets for institutional representatives, and the expenses of the participating
institution. (7/88, 6/99, 6/08)
c. Institutional Representatives’ Expenses.
The Conference shall provide conference delegate hospitality program expenses to the Chancellor or President or designated representative, members of the Council, and the Commissioner, as follows. (6/61, 9/61,
12/61, 12/70, 12/75, 5/76, 12/79, 6/86, 6/93, 2/98, 2/99, 6/08, 8/13, 8/14)
(1) During years when a Conference team participates in a College Football Playoff Non-Semifinal
Rose Bowl Game (traditional Big Ten/Pac-12 opponents).
(2) During years when a Conference team participates in a College Football Playoff Semifinal Rose
Bowl Game.
(3) During years when a Conference team participates in a College Football Playoff Championship
Game [except when the conference delegate hospitality program has already occurred during that
year’s preceding CFP Semifinal Rose Bowl Game, per AR 5-4-c-(2)].
An additional surrogate may attend the Rose Bowl at Conference expense if the surrogate’s institution’s
athletics director, senior woman administrator, and faculty athletics representative are unable to attend.
One other person may accompany each of these representatives at Conference expense. Expenses shall be
based upon coach round-trip air fares, a standard hotel room plus $50 per diem for the institutional representative only for a maximum of four days, and one complimentary ticket for each person. (6/61, 9/61,
12/61, 12/70, 12/75, 5/76, 12/79, 6/86, 6/93, 2/98, 2/99, 6/08, 8/13, 8/14)
d. Distribution of Remaining Receipts.
The balance of the net receipts due the Conference by terms of the contract will be divided as set forth in ER
1-3 after deducting Conference expenses. The Conference office shall distribute the receipts to the member
institutions. (5/60, 5/76, 3/83, 7/88, 6/92)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 79

The Rose Bowl

AR 5-5

AR 5-5-b-(3)

5. Ticket Policies.
Ticket policies for the Rose Bowl game shall be established by contract. All Rose Bowl tickets must be sold at
face value. Discounts or surcharges, other than shipping and handling charges, shall not be allowed without
the permission of the Rose Bowl Management Committee. (7/88, 6/05)
a. Allocation When a Conference Team Participates in a Traditional Rose Bowl Game.
(1) Competing Institution.
The participating Conference member institution shall remit in full to the Tournament of Roses payment for all Rose Bowl tickets for which it is chargeable (Approx. 30,000 tickets). Such payment shall be
remitted by February 15 of the year of the game in which the institution participates so the Tournament
of Roses may forward to the Conference no later than April 1 all funds owed it for the game. (6/94,
6/03, 12/14)
(2) Non-Competing Institutions.
The Conference member institutions not participating in the Rose Bowl game are allocated a total of
5,000 tickets, which are in a pool, and are allocated to the teams based upon need. The institutions shall
not sell these tickets to brokers or make the tickets available through the secondary ticket market unless
first offered to the institution participating in the Rose Bowl. (5/60, 7/88, 6/99, 12/14, 11/16)
(3) Tickets to Conference Administrators.
Each Conference institution will receive eight non-mutual complimentary tickets for its official family representatives [President or Chancellor, and Council members] (96 tickets). Additional tickets for
these representatives must come from the institution’s normal allotment. (7/88, 12/14)
(4) Tickets for Conference Office.
The Conference office shall be allocated 350 Rose Bowl tickets. (6/62, 6/99, 12/14)
b. Allocation When a Conference Team Participates in a CFP Semifinal Game at the Rose Bowl.
(1) Competing Institution.
The participating Conference member institution shall remit in full to the Tournament of Roses payment for all Rose Bowl tickets for which it is chargeable (Approx. 12,500 tickets). Such payment shall be
remitted by February 15 of the year of the game in which the institution participates so the Tournament
of Roses may forward to the Conference no later than April 1 all funds owed it for the game. (6/94,
6/03, 12/14)
(2) Non-Competing Institutions.
The Conference member institutions not participating in the CFP Semifinal Game at the Rose Bowl are
allocated 1,000 tickets (or fewer), which are in a pool, and are allocated to the teams based upon need.
The institutions shall not sell these tickets to brokers or make the tickets available through the secondary ticket market unless first offered to the institution participating in the CFP Semifinal Game. (5/60,
7/88, 6/99, 12/14, 11/16)
(3) Tickets to Conference Administrators.
Each Conference institution will receive eight non-mutual complimentary tickets for its official family representatives [President or Chancellor, and Council members] (96 tickets). Additional tickets for
these representatives must come from the institution’s normal allotment. (7/88, 12/14)
2022-23 Handbook • Page 80

Officiating

AR 5-5-b-(4)

AR 6-1-a-(1)

(4) Tickets for Conference Office.
The Conference office shall be allocated 200 Rose Bowl tickets. (6/62, 6/99, 12/14)
c. Allocation When a Conference Team is not a Participant in a CFP Semifinal Game at the Rose Bowl.
When a Conference team is not a participant in a CFP Semifinal Game at the Rose Bowl, a maximum of
1,000 tickets will be allocated to the Conference to be divided among the Conference office and the Conference members. (6/00, 10/05, 6/11, 12/14)
d. Allocation
When
a
Conference
Team
Participates
in
the
College
Football Playoff National Championship Game at a Site Other Than the Rose Bowl.
When a Conference team participates in the CFP National Championship Game, the Conference office shall
be permitted to purchase from the participating institution 300 tickets for use by the Conference’s official
family. (2/99, 6/11, 12/14)
6. Miscellaneous.
a. Participation in Other Bowls.
Conference teams may participate without restriction in other bowls, including participation against member institutions of the Big Ten Conference, except no Conference team shall participate in a bowl game on
January 1 (or January 2 when the Rose Bowl is played on that date) which would begin later than 11:15 a.m.
Pacific Time (2:15 p.m. Eastern Time) or which would begin earlier than 4:45 p.m. Pacific Time (7:45 p.m.
Eastern Time). (7/88)
b. Rose Bowl Symbols.
The Rose Bowl champion, at its own expense, may fly a Rose Bowl flag at its stadium or wear Rose Bowl
decals on its helmets during the next football season if it so desires. (5/66)

CHAPTER 6—OFFICIATING
1. Officiating Program.
The Conference office will operate a program to identify, train, and assign officials and maintain a list of approved officials for football, men’s and women’s basketball, baseball, softball, men’s and women’s soccer,
women’s volleyball, and wrestling. The Conference will assign officials for contests hosted by member institutions in those sports from the lists, which shall be updated annually. Other conferences may be served upon
their request and approval by the Conference. (8/88, 6/93, 6/94, 6/02, 3/03, 6/07, 6/09, 8/16, 8/21)
All assignments by the Conference are subject to change or withdrawal at the sole discretion of the Commissioner. (6/04)
a. Assigning Exceptions.
The only exceptions to this assigning policy above are as follows:
(1) Men’s Basketball.
Each member institution shall be allowed to use reverse officiating crews for home and away nonConference men’s basketball games against teams from conferences other than the Big West and West
Coast. (6/93, 6/94, 6/95)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 81

Officiating

AR 6-1-a-(2)

AR 6-4

(2) Women’s Basketball.
Each member institution may exchange women’s basketball officials with other conferences for nonConference games and/or tournaments for which the member institution shall pay the additional
costs. (6/93, 6/94, 6/95)
(3) Football.
For any non-Conference football game the officiating crew may be assigned by either the home institution’s officiating agency or the visiting institution’s officiating agency per the game contract. (5/72,
3/83, 3/88, 4/90, 6/01, 6/10)
2. Appointment to Officiate.
The Conference annually shall compile a list of approved officials comprised of individuals who demonstrate
superior ability to officiate a particular sport and the capability to work games at the major college level. Specific game assignments will be made from the list for the ensuing academic year upon the offer and acceptance
of an official’s contract for the specific sport. Appointment to the list does not guarantee any game assignments,
If an official is offered and accepts a contract for independent officiating services with the Conference and specific game assignment(s) are offered, said assignment(s) are for the upcoming season only and do not guarantee
listing or assignments beyond the specific season designated in the contract. All such contracts are for one year
only. (8/88, 6/94, 12/04)
3. Guidelines for Selection of New Officials.
To be considered for initial appointment to an officiating list in the Conference, the applicant must at a minimum:
a. Have demonstrated proficiency in officiating. Such proficiency may be established through submission of reports and recommendations by persons knowledgeable about officiating and the applicant’s work
as an official and/or through observation of the applicant by a Conference representative.
b. Demonstrate the proper physical attributes, conditioning, and appearance required to officiate on the
Conference level.
c. Possess the maturity and judgment to command the respect of college players and coaches so as to
maintain control of any game the official may officiate and thereby assure safe playing conditions for the
participants.
d. Have sufficient freedom in his or her occupation to enable the official to attend the annual Conference
clinic and weekly area association meetings during the season.
e.

Provide evidence of a proper physical examination from a medical doctor.

f.

To the extent possible, live within the Conference area or in close proximity. (8/85, 8/14)

g. Shall grant the Conference prior approval to conduct background checks on him/her at the discretion
of the Conference. (9/07)
4. Evaluation and Reappointment of Officials.
Subsequent to each season, each official will be evaluated prior to appointment to the list of approved officials
for the following academic year, and the Conference may or may not offer a contract to the official for the next
upcoming year at the sole discretion of the Conference. (4/78, 8/88, 6/94, 10/00, 6/01, 12/04)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 82

Officiating

AR 6-5

AR 6-5-c

5. Officials’ Fees, Expenses, and Amenities.
Fees and expenses [except for the sport of women’s gymnastics (for which the National Association of Women’s
Gymnastics Judges shall set expenses)] for officials assigned to work contests in the sports of football, men’s
basketball, women’s basketball, women’s volleyball, baseball, softball, women’s gymnastics, women’s lacrosse,
men’s soccer, and women’s soccer shall be established by the Conference office and reported to the Conference members. Officials in football, men’s basketball, women’s basketball, women’s lacrosse, softball, baseball,
men’s soccer, women’s soccer, and women’s volleyball shall be paid by the Conference office via a deduction
from the year-end distribution to the members. (12/90, 3/94, 12/95, 6/99, 2/00, 6/02, 10/02, 2/08, 6/09, 5/10,
10/10, 8/14, 8/16, 7/20)
a. Amenities.
For every home football, men’s basketball, women’s basketball, women’s volleyball, baseball, softball, and
women’s soccer contest, each Conference member shall provide to the game officials beverages in sufficient
quantity so that each official may have one before the contest, one during an intermission, and one following the contest; one sandwich, or its equivalent, following the game; a sufficient supply of game programs;
sufficient towels and soap; two complimentary admissions via gate list to contest to which official has been
assigned; and a pre-contest “countdown” schedule. (12/93, 6/02, 10/02, 6/09, 10/10, 8/13, 8/14)
b. Expenses.
In sports other than men’s basketball, women’s basketball, and football, for trips of less than 200 miles (one
way), game officials shall receive a round-trip mileage allowance of IRS rates. For trips of 200 miles or more
(one way), game officials shall receive airfare costs as established by the Conference office (add ten percent
to the seven-day non-refundable advance fare allowance), a round-trip mileage allowance of IRS rates
between the official’s home and airport, a $35 fee for airport parking, and a fee for transportation from the
airport that is local to the game site as follows: (12/90, 12/91, 12/93, 12/94, 12/95, 12/96, 2/98, 6/98, 6/99,
2/01, 6/02, 3/03, 1/05, 1/07, 6/07, 2/08, 6/08, 5/10, 4/11, 4/12, 8/13, 8/14)
Arizona. ................................. $25
Arizona State........................... 25
California................................. 35
Colorado. ................................. 50
Oregon...................................... 20
Oregon State............................ 35
Stanford.................................... 35
UCLA. ...................................... 35
USC........................................... 35
Utah.......................................... 20
Washington.............................. 35
Washington State.................... 50
c. Flat Fees.
In men’s basketball, women’s basketball, football and baseball game officials shall be compensated with a
flat fee, which includes the game fee and all expense allowances as follows: (4/12, 6/12, 7/22)
SPORT
Men’s basketball*
Women’s basketball*
Football
Referee
IR official

FLAT FEE
$3800/3200/2600
$3300/2800/2300
$3988 Saturday games/$4258 other days
$4277 Saturday games/$4488 other days
$3988 Saturday games/$4358 other days

2022-23 Handbook • Page 83
Updated 8/1/2021

AR 6-5-c
IR communicator
Baseball
Tier 1

Officiating

AR 6-5-e

$3313 Saturday games/$3575 other days

$3100 Series/$1400 Single Game if travelled 200+miles
$2200 Series/$1020 Single Game if travelled under 200 miles
Tier 2
$2600 Series/$935 Single Game if travelled 200+ miles
$2200 Series/$935 Single Game if travelled under 200 miles
*—Flat fee is dependent upon the particular official assigned to the contest. All men’s and women’s basketball officials shall be provided a flat fee of $1250 for exhibition games. (5/10, 4/11, 6/17, 6/18, 7/22)
d. Game Fees.
The game fees are in accordance with the following table:
SPORT
Women’s volleyball
Women’s gymnastics
Women’s lacrosse
Softball
Crew chief
Others
Men’s & Women’s soccer
Observers
Women’s basketball
Women’s volleyball
Baseball
Softball
Men’s soccer
Women’s soccer

FEE
$475 Referee 1 & Referee 2/$200 plus mileage for line judges
$325
$350 Conference/non-Conference
Spring: $450 Conference/non-Conference; Fall: $200, no expenses**
Spring: $300Conference/non-Conference; Fall: $125, no expenses**
Fall: 330 (center); $200 (assistants)/$150 fourth (table) official + $45 per diem
Spring: $200 (center), $150 (assistants), no expenses + mileage
$150, plus mileage
$150, plus mileage
$150, plus mileage
$125, plus mileage
$125, plus mileage
$125, plus mileage

(6/87, 11/87, 6/88, 12/88, 4/90, 6/90, 12/90, 6/91, 12/91, 6/92, 12/93, 12/94, 12/95, 12/96, 2/98, 2/99,
6/99, 2/00, 2/01, 2/02, 6/02, 10/02, 3/03, 2/04, 1/05, 2/06, 1/07, 2/08, 6/09, 5/10, 4/11, 4/12, 12/13, 8/14,
8/15, 8/16, 8/17, 6/18, 12/18, 7/19, 7/22)
*—Non-Conference competition is defined as non-Conference games, neutral site games, and tournaments.
(2/04, 5/10, 8/14, 8/16)
**—Non-Conference competition is defined as non-Conference games, neutral site games, and tournaments
with four participating teams or fewer. (Game fees for tournaments with more than four participating teams
shall be $250. In addition, $75 per diem shall be paid and complimentary hotel rooms provided as determined by the officiating coordinator.) (2/06, 1/07, 2/08, 5/10, 4/12, 8/16, 6/17, 7/19)
e. Per Diem.
In sports other than men’s basketball, women’s basketball, and football, for trips of less than 200 miles, officials shall receive a $45 per diem. An official scheduled on consecutive days at the same site who lives between 90-199 miles away may be provided with $250 per diem for each day on which overnight lodging is
required, a $45 per diem for the final day, and round-trip mileage for one trip. For trips of 200 miles or more,
officials shall receive a per diem for each day on which overnight lodging is required, and a $150 per diem
for the final day provided the official can return home that day. (12/90, 12/91, 12/93, 12/94, 12/95, 12/96,
2/98, 6/98, 6/99, 2/01, 6/02, 3/03, 2/04, 1/05, 2/08, 3/09, 6/09, 5/10, 4/11, 4/12, 8/13/8/15, 7/19, 7/20)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 84
Updated 8/1/2021

Officiating

AR 6-6

AR 6-9

6. Admissions and Parking for Game Officials and Evaluators.
a. Football and Men’s Basketball.
Game of﻿ficials and evaluators in the sports of football and men’s basketball shall be provided two complimentary admissions for home contests to which they are assigned. In men’s basketball, parking passes
shall be mailed in advance of the game, while the two complimentary admissions shall be left at will call.
Football officiating crews shall be provided six parking passes (four of them in a preferred area) per game.
(8/90, 6/95, 6/02, 6/05, 6/10, 8/14)
b. Women’s Volleyball, Baseball, Softball, Men’s Soccer, Women’s Soccer.
Game officials and observers in the sports of women’s volleyball, baseball, softball, men’s soccer, and women’s soccer shall be provided two complimentary admissions via a gate pass list for Conference home contests to which they are assigned. The names of the guests of the officials or observers shall not be required
in advance of the contest. (6/89, 6/91, 10/01, 6/02, 6/09, 8/16)
c. Women’s Basketball.
Game officials in the sport of women’s basketball shall be provided two complimentary admissions via a
gate pass list for home contests to which they are assigned. The names of the guests of the officials shall
not be required in advance of the contest. Observers shall be mailed two complimentary admissions and
a parking pass in advance of the contest whenever possible. In addition to the two complimentary admissions, the observer shall be assigned a seat in the media area to the extent possible. In the case of a men’s
and women’s basketball doubleheader, these privileges only apply to the women’s game. Women’s basketball officials and observers must make other arrangements with the host institution if they desire to attend
the men’s contest as a part of the doubleheader. (6/89, 6/91)
7. Public Comments on Conference Programs and Coach/Student-Athlete/Official Conduct.
The Conference has comprehensive restrictions on public comments on officiating by coaches, student-athletes,
officials, and institutional representatives set forth in CER 4. Violations of these provisions shall be regarded as
most serious by the Conference. (8/85, 6/94)
8. Former Officials’ Recognition.
Former Conference football, basketball, baseball, women’s soccer, softball, and women’s volleyball officials
who served with distinction may be recognized by the Conference. In the sport of football, the official must
have worked 10 years and 50 major college contests. In the sport of basketball, the official must have worked
10 years and 200 major college contests. Upon request, the honored officials will be provided one complimentary ticket for all regularly scheduled Conference games in their sport and have the right to purchase one additional adjacent seat if available. Requests must be made to the Conference office 30 days prior to the start of
the season. The Conference office will furnish a list of those officials to the Directors of Athletics of the member
institutions. (12/61, 4/86, 12/95, 10/05, 8/14)
9. Pool Reporter for Officiating Interpretations.
Upon request from the media for a rules interpretation, a pool reporter will be selected by the home Sports
Information Director of a Conference member for the purpose of obtaining that interpretation from the chief
of the officiating crew. After a ten-minute cooling off period, the SID will accompany the pool reporter to the
officials’ dressing room. The observer shall assist the chief of the officiating crew in preparation for the meeting
with the pool reporter. The officials may not be interviewed concerning judgment calls. (6/88, 6/01)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 85

Officiating

AR 6-9-a

AR 6-11-d

a. Announcement of Officials.
Names of contest officials shall not be revealed to the public prior to game day or announced by the public
address system at a Conference contest. Officials’ names may be printed in game programs, speed cards
distributed in the press box, and other publications (including newspapers) issued the day of the game.
(5/66, 6/96, 8/14)
10. Football.
a. Playing Rules Test.
A football official must pass the NCAA football rules test with a score specified by the Coordinator of Officials in order to officiate in the Conference. Officials may retake the test in order to secure the minimum
score. (6/93)
b. Practice Sessions and Scrimmages.
Football officials may work an unlimited number of institutional practices or scrimmages during pre-season and spring practice periods, but may not work at practice sessions or scrimmages during the regular
season. (6/09)
c. Instructions to Timers.
The Conference office will publish instructions for official timers of Conference football games and distribute them to the timers. The timers will be instructed further to meet with the game of﻿ficials prior to each
Conference football game. (6/65)
d. Identification of Officials.
Conference football officials shall be identified with letters on the back of their uniform shirt representing
field positions (e.g., "R"–referee, "U"–umpire). (12/90)
11. Men’s Basketball.
a. Video to Observers and Officials.
It shall be required that each member institution provide its evaluators and game officials a video of each of
its home basketball games using the Conference-approved video replay system immediately following the
game for training and evaluation purposes. If the instant replay system fails, a DVD copy will be provided.
(4/87, 10/05, 6/07, 6/09, 8/14)
b. Preseason Scrimmages.
If men’s basketball officials are assigned through the Conference for practices or practice scrimmages, a
fee of $200 shall be provided. Institutions are not required to use Conference rostered officials. If officials
must travel more than 100 miles to the site, actual travel expenses will be reimbursed. While in attendance
for the scrimmage, the officials shall instruct teams regarding new playing rules. (6/99, 6/02, 12/13, 8/14)
c. Conference assignments.
An official may be assigned to no more than six home Conference games of any member institution. (6/99)
d. Officials Arrival.
An official assigned to work a game at Washington State that starts prior to 3:00 p.m. shall be required to
arrive on site the night before the contest, and shall be provided an extra per diem. (6/08, 8/14)
2022-23 Handbook • Page 86

Officiating

AR 6-11-e

AR 6-13-e

e. Officiating Expenses.
Expenses for men’s basketball officials for Conference games shall be shared equally by all member institutions. (6/12)
12. Women’s Basketball.
a. Absence of Official.
Prior to the beginning of a contest, if one official is present and the status of the second official is unknown,
play must begin with one official within 15 minutes of the game’s scheduled starting time. If one official is
present and the status of the second official is known, play must begin with one or two officials within 30
minutes of the game’s scheduled starting time. (6/92)
b. Game Video.
Institutions shall provide a video (the broadcast video, if the game was televised) to each game official and
observer who works a game hosted by Conference members immediately following the contest using the
Conference-approved video replay system. If the instant replay system fails, a DVD copy will be provided.
(6/01, 6/12, 8/14)
c. Officiating Expenses.
Expenses for women’s basketball officials for Conference games shall be shared equally by all member
institutions. (6/12)
13. Women’s Volleyball.
a. Travel Allowance.
The total cost of the officials’ travel allowance for Conference matches shall be shared equally by all Conference members. (12/90, 12/91, 6/94, 5/97)
b. Line Judges.
The Coordinator of Volleyball Officiating will assign line judges. (2/98, 8/14)
c. Evaluation of Match Conduct.
The R1 shall evaluate match conduct, including such items as greeting, ball shaggers, lines judges, scorer,
clock operator, and general event management. Evaluations shall be returned to the Conference office after
every match and any problems identified shall be discussed with the institutions in question. (5/90, 5/91,
6/94)
d. Officials Arrival.
Officials must arrive at least 60 minutes prior to the start of the match (6/02).
e. Substitute Official Procedure.
If an official does not appear for a match for which he or she was scheduled, the following procedure shall
be followed:
(1) The appropriate athletics administrator shall call the Coordinator of Volleyball Officiating and request a substitute official.
(2) The on-site event administrator shall directly contact local officials.
2022-23 Handbook • Page 87

AR 6-13-e

Officiating

AR 6-14-d

(3) The on-site event administrator shall secure an official from the audience if agreeable to both
coaches.
(4) If the coaches cannot agree on an official from the audience, then only one official shall be used.
(5) Cancellation of the match is not an option.
(6) After the match, the Coordinator of Volleyball Officiating shall be notified of the official’s absence
and appropriate action shall be taken. (4/88, 6/90)
f.

Uniform of Officials and Line Judges.

Officials and line judges shall be required to wear official uniforms—dark pants and white shirt—when
working a Conference volleyball match. (11/86, 7/20)
g. Officiating Clinics.
The women’s volleyball officiating clinic shall be scheduled by the Coordinator of Volleyball Officiating
with the date and site to be set in advance. (6/89, 5/91, 1/92, 6/92, 6/94, 10/02)
h. Security Escort for Officials.
A security person shall be assigned to all women’s volleyball officials to escort them as needed, including
to the official’s vehicle after the conclusion of the match. (6/95, 6/02)
14. Baseball.
a. Coaches’ Evaluations.
Coaches shall be required to submit umpire evaluations following each series. Year-end composite evaluation information shall be provided to the coaches at their annual meeting. (10/04)
b. Expenses.
At the conclusion of the season, total umpire expenses for Conference games shall be shared equally by
the Conference’s baseball-playing institutions. (6/93, 12/93, 12/94, 10/95, 11/96, 8/98, 6/01, 6/02, 3/03)
c. Game Policies.
All umpires shall be required to report to the game site at least one hour prior to the start of Conference
games. (8/98)
All Conference games shall be umpired using the policies contained in the NCAA Baseball Umpiring Mechanics Manual. (11/96)
Among the duties of the crew chief shall be the completion of a report of the conduct of the series. The
report shall be forwarded to the Conference office following the series and shall be shared with the other
crew chiefs. (11/96)
The umpires shall be provided a dressing room separate from the teams and coaches as well as a security
escort between the field and the dressing room both before and after each Conference game. (6/93, 10/95,
11/96, 8/98)
d. Umpiring Clinic.
An annual baseball umpiring clinic shall be scheduled by the Coordinator of Baseball Officiating. Attendance of all rostered umpires (and observers, when invited) is mandatory. (6/02)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 88

AR 6-15

Officiating

AR 6-16-e

15. Women’s Gymnastics.
a. Dual Meets.
Assignment policies shall comply with NCAA requirements. For regular-season meets, a $325 meet fee
shall be paid to all judges by the host institution and per diem shall be determined per NAGWJ rules. (6/00,
6/01, 6/06, 2/08, 8/13, 7/19)
b. Conference Championships.
(1) Assignment policies shall comply with NCAA requirements. (5/90, 6/06)
(2) There shall be four judges per event. The head judge for each event shall have a national brevet
ranking; the other judges for each event shall have at least a Level 10 rating. (6/05)
(3) A meet referee, with no judging responsibilities, shall be present. The meet referee shall possess a
minimum of an Elite judge’s rating. The meet referee must attend or appoint an official representative
to attend the coaches’ meeting. (6/94, 6/96, 6/00, 6/01, 6/06)
(4) The meet referee and event judges assigned to the Conference Championships shall be paid fees
(as determined by the Conference office) and expenses in accordance with the NCAA Championships
policy, except that the fee provided to judges shall be $400. It is recommended that line judges be secured from the area at no cost. Officiating fees and expenses shall be shared equally by participating
institutions if total expenses are not covered by net income. (5/91, 6/00, 6/01, 6/03, 6/06, 6/07, 8/13)
16. Softball.
a. Assignment Policies.
The assignment of officials to non-Conference contests shall maximize the use of local of﻿ficials whenever
possible unless the host institution requests the assignment of top-rated of﻿ficials to particularly significant
contests. (6/87, 6/90, 12/90, 12/91, 2/00, 10/00, 10/02)
b. Evaluation.
The head coach of each team shall complete an umpire evaluation form for each assignment. For Conference games, each home team shall send each plate umpire a video of the game he/she worked the previous
weekend to assist in self-evaluation. If not provided on site, institutions shall make their best effort to send
the video before the subsequent weekend’s games. (6/88, 6/90, 2/00, 10/01, 10/02, 8/14)
c. Expenses.
At the conclusion of the season, total umpire expenses for Conference games shall be shared equally by the
Conference’s softball-playing institutions. (12/90, 12/91, 2/99, 2/00, 10/00, 6/02, 3/03)
d. Game Policies.
All umpires shall be required to report to the game site at least two hours prior to the start of the first game
of Conference games. (10/02, 8/14)
All Conference games shall be umpired using the policies contained in the NCAA Softball Umpiring Manual. (10/02)
Among the duties of the crew chief shall be the completion of a report of the conduct of the series. (10/02)
e. Umpiring Clinic.
An annual softball umpiring clinic shall be scheduled by the Coordinator of Softball Officiating. Attendance of all rostered umpires (and observers, when invited) is mandatory. (10/02)
2022-23 Handbook • Page 89

AR 6-17

External Communications, Political Activities, Government Relations

AR 7-2

17. Women’s Soccer.
a. Assignment Policies.
The assignment of officials to non-Conference contests shall maximize the use of local officials whenever
possible unless otherwise requested by the host institution. Assistant referees may to work lines for any
one team up to five times in a season and referees may work up to three matches for one team in a season.
(6/09, 6/10)
b. Evaluation.
A coach from each team shall complete an evaluation of the officials by 5:00 p.m. Pacific Time each weekend
for home matches or for matches at another Conference site. For Conference games, the home team shall
send the center referee a video of the game he/she worked the previous weekend to assist in self-evaluation. Institutions shall make their best effort to send the video before the subsequent weekend’s game.
(6/09, 6/11, 8/14)
c. Expenses.
At the conclusion of the season, total officiating expenses for Conference games shall be shared equally by
member institutions with women’s soccer programs. (6/09)
d. Game Policies.
All officials shall be required to report to the match site at least two hours before the start of Conference
matches. (6/09)

CHAPTER 7—EXTERNAL COMMUNICATIONS, POLITICAL ACTIVITIES, GOVERNMENT
RELATIONS
The Conference is a California unincorporated association organized and operated exclusively for charitable
purposes. The Conference has applied for exemption from federal income taxation under Internal Revenue
Code (“Code”) Section 501(c)(3). To preserve its tax-exempt status, the following policies apply: (8/10)
1. Communications with the Media and Public.
All persons affiliated with the Conference, including members of the Pac-12 Board of Directors, staff, and any
Conference committees, should remember that they may be perceived by the public as representing the Conference and the views of any of those affiliated with the Conference and should consider any comments about
the Conference in that light and in furtherance of the best interests of the Conference. Additionally, all persons
affiliated with the Conference shall keep confidential all matters and issues discussed at meetings of the Pac-12
Board of Directors and Council and other Conference-initiated meetings (except to the extent such matters must
be shared with staff and third parties who have a need to know in order to effectuate new or changed rules,
regulations, procedures or policies); this confidentiality principle shall also apply to any documents or other
material distributed at such meetings. (8/10, 6/11)
2. Communications with Governmental Officials or Agencies, Community Groups.
The Conference expects to be able to engage various governmental and quasi-governmental entities and community groups on issues of concern to the Conference. In order to present a consistent message from the Conference and to enhance its ability to successfully express its positions, only those individuals expressly designated
by the Pac-12 Board of Directors, or in its discretion, the Commissioner or his or her designee may communicate
on behalf of or concerning the Conference. The Commissioner and his or her designees shall submit all communications, proposals, responses to request for proposals, grant requests and government contracts, reports,
press releases, or other documents on behalf of the Conference to any governmental and quasi-governmental
entities or community groups. (8/10)
2022-23 Handbook • Page 90

External Communications, Political Activities, Government Relations

AR 7-3

AR 7-5

3. Political Activities.
As a tax-exempt organization under Code Section 501(c)(3), the Conference cannot intervene in any political
campaign on behalf of, or in opposition to, any candidate for public office. Therefore, the Conference will not,
and no affiliate, acting directly or indirectly on behalf of the Conference will, participate in or intervene in any
political campaign on behalf of any candidate for public office, including the publishing or distributing of statements. Violation of this prohibition could result in the Conference’s loss of its tax-exempt status or imposition
of excise taxes. All persons affiliated with the Conference, including but not limited to members of the Pac-12
Board of Directors, administration, faculty, staff and any Conference committees, will refrain from engaging in
the following activities on the Conference’s property, during business functions or while otherwise using the
Conference’s resources or facilities: (8/10)
a.

Endorsing any candidate for public office; (8/10)

b. Donating or contributing to any candidate’s campaign; (8/10)
c.

Participating or engaging in political fundraising events; (8/10)

d. Publishing or distributing statements for or against any candidate; or (8/10)
e.

Engaging in any other activity that favors or opposes any candidate. (8/10)

4. Lobbying.
No substantial part of the activities of the Conference will consist of carrying on propaganda, or otherwise attempting to influence legislation, except to the extent permitted by applicable law and regulations for not-forprofit, tax-exempt organizations. The Commissioner and his or her designees shall direct all activities which
may be deemed to fall within this section. (8/10)
5. Disclosure Requirements.
As a tax-exempt organization, the Conference is subject to ongoing disclosure requirements to the IRS, state
regulatory agencies, and the general public. The Commissioner shall be responsible for responding to all requests for disclosure of information to ensure compliance with applicable disclosure requirements as failure to
comply may result in revocation of the Conference’s tax-exempt status. (8/10)
a. Disclosure of any changes in sources of support, purposes, character, or method of operation, including, but not limited to amendments to the Conference’s Constitution and Bylaws, to the IRS. (8/10)
b. Disclosure* of the Conference’s Form 990 and 990-T (if applicable) for three years after the later of the
due date of the return or the date the return is filed. [Note: Certain information such as donor names and
address may be redacted prior to public disclosure.] (8/10)
c. Disclosure* of the Conference’s exemption application submitted to the IRS together with any supporting documents as well as its exemption letter. (8/10)
d. Disclosure of state charities filings. [Note: Many states also allow a charitable organization to refer the
request to the state regulatory agency that oversees charitable organizations to obtain these filings.] (8/10)
*—Copies of these documents must be provided to any individual upon written or in person request without charge other than reasonable fees for copying and postage. The Conference may fulfill this requirement
by placing these documents on the Internet. (8/10)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 91

Initiation and Review of Proposed NCAA Legislation

AR 8-1

AR 8-3-b-(1)

CHAPTER 8—INITIATION AND REVIEW OF PROPOSED NCAA LEGISLATION
1. Initiation of Legislation.
a. By Individuals.
Any Council member or the Commissioner may initiate NCAA legislative proposals with the appropriate
administrative committee or the Council. The Conference’s representatives on the applicable NCAA governance bodies may not propose legislation independently to those bodies. (2/98, 3/08, 12/14)
b. By Conference Groups.
NCAA proposals from Conference coaches or other groups are treated as recommendations and shall be
forwarded to the Legislative Committee [see AR 1-2-b-(2)-(e)]. (2/98, 6/11)
c. Conference Vote To Initiate Legislation.
A majority vote of the Council shall be required to propose NCAA legislation on behalf of the Conference.
(2/98, 6/01)
2. Review of Legislation.
The Legislative Committee of the Council shall review proposed NCAA legislation that originates outside
the Conference to recommend a vote to the Conference’s members. The Pac-12 Board of Directors shall not be
required to review the Conference’s position on all legislation. The Conference’s Board of Directors representative shall communicate with the Pac-12 Board of Directors on an as-needed basis to alert it to the current and
future work of the Board. (2/98, 3/08, 12/14)
3. Voting on Proposed Legislation.
a. Vote by Conference Members.
For each NCAA legislative proposal, the Council shall be surveyed to determine the Conference’s position,
and, therefore, the vote of the Conference’s position on that proposal. (2/98, 6/01, 6/05, 3/08, 10/08, 12/14)
b. Vote by Conference Representatives.
The Conference’s NCAA governance body representative is a Conference representative, not an individual
member of that body, and shall be expected to vote as directed by the Council on those issues on which
the Conference has had the opportunity to adopt a formal position in accordance with AR 8-3-b-(1) below.
(2/98, 3/08, 10/08, 12/14)
It is expected that in some instances the Conference will not have adopted a formal position on matters
that are considered by NCAA governance bodies. Thus the Conference’s representatives on those bodies
may be uninstructed and may take positions based upon their knowledge of the Conference’s philosophy
and their professional experiences. However, they should remember that they are representing all member
institutions, not one, nor a personal viewpoint. (10/08, 6/11)
If a Conference position has been adopted on a legislative proposal, the Conference’s representative on that
body shall follow the voting guidelines set forth in AR 8-3-b-(1) and AR 8-3-b-(2). (10/08, 12/14)
(1) Directed Vote.
Two-thirds or more votes of the Council in favor of or in opposition to an NCAA legislative proposal
shall result in a directed vote on the specified proposal. If a lesser majority or a tie vote of the Council

2022-23 Handbook • Page 92

AR 8-3-b-(2)

Expense Reimbursement

AR 9-2-d

occurs, the Conference’s representative shall vote exercising his/her best professional judgment. (2/98,
6/05, 3/08, 10/08, 6/11, 12/14)
(2) Judgment Vote.
If a vote directed by the Conference is considered to be inappropriate after the representative receives
pertinent new information about the matter, the representative may use his/her best judgment in determining how to vote. (2/98, 10/08, 12/14)

CHAPTER 9—EXPENSE REIMBURSEMENT
1. Meeting Expenses.
Expenses of Pac-12 Board of Directors members, Faculty Athletics Representatives Committee members, subcommittee members, and other non-employees may be paid or reimbursed for attending meetings or in the
conduct of approved Conference business or other functions. (1/83, 6/90, 8/10, 12/19)
Receipts are required for all reimbursable expenditure(s) paid by the traveler that exceeds $25.00. Allow at least
two weeks after receipt at the Conference for reimbursement. (8/10, 12/19)
Reimbursement is allowed for reasonable, ordinary, and necessary expenses incurred in connection with approved expenses or travel on behalf of the Conference. (8/10)
The Conference will reimburse individuals traveling on official business the cost of round-trip coach class
airfare, actual lodging cost, and meals. Guest travel, lodging, and meals are not generally reimbursable. (8/10)
2. Reimbursable Expenses.
Expenses incidental to meetings of the Board of Directors, the Faculty Athletics Representatives Committee,
and other subcommittees shall be reimbursed by the Conference as follows: (1/83, 6/90, 12/19)
a. Airfare.
The least expensive commercial airfare in coach class will be reimbursable from the airport nearest the traveler’s home or office to the airport nearest the destination. (1/83, 6/90, 6/09, 8/10)
b. Automobile, Train, or Bus.
Total reimbursable expenses including expenses incurred en-route shall not exceed the cost of coach-class
airfare. Automobile expenses shall be reimbursed at the following rates: (1) current IRS reimbursement rate
for personal vehicle use; or (2) 30 cents per mile for employer-provided vehicle use. Airport parking, tolls,
and parking at Conference meeting locations shall be reimbursed at reasonable (lower tier) rates. (1/83,
6/90, 6/09, 8/10, 12/13)
c. Lodging.
Lodging at the single-room rate for days of meetings, including night before and night after, if flight schedules make necessary such stays. For Conference meetings, the Conference shall pay the cost of the standard
room and room tax costs established by Conference arrangements. (1/83, 12/90, 8/10)
d. Meals.
The reasonable cost of meals while attending meetings and while in transit to and from the meeting site.
If, in addition, meals are purchased and reimbursement sought for other travelers, the additional travelers
must be identified as one for whom the Conference has responsibility for such expenses. (8/10)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 93

AR 9-2-e

Expense Reimbursement

AR 9-4

e. Per Diem and Other Expenses.
Individuals attending Conference meetings who reside outside the area where the meeting is held shall
have the option of receiving a per diem allowance to cover meals and miscellaneous expenses. The per
diem shall be a $25 per diem if traveling the day prior to the meeting to the area where the meeting is held;
a $20 per diem for the day traveling home; and miscellaneous expenses of $50 or the actual cost, whichever
is greater, for mileage to and from the airport, toll, parking, or taxi. (1/83, 6/87, 6/90, 6/09, 10/09, 8/10)
Reimbursement of expenses for attendance at meetings of other Conference groups (each of which must be approved in advance), shall be limited to transportation between cities only. (5/84)
3. Non-Reimbursable Expenditures.
When lodging accommodations have been arranged by the Conference, and the traveler elects to stay elsewhere, reimbursement is made at an amount no higher than the rate negotiated by the Conference, and reimbursement is not made for transportation between the alternate lodging and the meeting site. (8/10)
Entertainment costs (including movies), room refreshment center expenditures, personal services (babysitters,
etc.), airline/hotel/rental car club membership dues, excessive baggage charges (unless absolutely necessary
for the business purpose for travel), loss of personal items, etc. shall not be reimbursed. (8/10)
4. Exceptions.
Exceptions to this policy may be made by the Commissioner, or designee, when judged to be fair, reasonable
and of benefit to the Conference. In such cases, the request for exception and the reasons for approval should
be in written form. (8/10)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 94

SPORTS POLICIES
& REGULATIONS
SPR

Subject

Page

Chapter 1—Baseball Regulations........................................................................................... 96
Chapter 2—Men’s Basketball Regulations.......................................................................... 102
Chapter 3—Women’s Basketball Regulations. ....................................................................111
Chapter 4—Women’s Beach Volleyball Regulations. ........................................................ 119
Chapter 5—Men’s and Women’s Cross Country Regulations......................................... 122
Chapter 6—Football Regulations. ........................................................................................ 125
Chapter 7—Men’s Golf Regulations.................................................................................... 140
Chapter 8—Women’s Golf Regulations............................................................................... 145
Chapter 9—Women’s Gymnastic Regulations. .................................................................. 149
Chapter 10—Women’s Lacrosse Regulations..................................................................... 153
Chapter 11—Men’s and Women’s Rowing Regulations................................................... 157
Chapter 12—Men’s Soccer Regulations............................................................................... 162
Chapter 13—Women’s Soccer Regulations......................................................................... 167
Chapter 14—Softball Regulations. ....................................................................................... 171
Chapter 15—Men’s Swimming and Diving Regulations. ................................................ 178
Chapter 16—Women’s Swimming and Diving Regulations............................................ 185
Chapter 17—Men’s and Women’s Tennis Regulations. .................................................... 192
Chapter 18—Men’s and Women’s Track and Field Regulations...................................... 199
Chapter 19—Women’s Volleyball Regulations................................................................... 207
Chapter 20—Wrestling Regulations .................................................................................... 214

2022-23 Handbook • Page 95

Baseball Regulations

SPR 1-1

SPR 1-1-(c)

CHAPTER 1—BASEBALL REGULATIONS
1. Playing Season Policies.
a. Championship Determination.
The team with the highest won-lost percentage for all Conference games shall be the Conference champion.
This shall apply even in the event one or more teams do not play the full Conference schedule. If that percentage is shared by more than one team, a co-championship shall exist. (12/85, 8/89, 8/90, 6/91, 6/94,
6/95, 8/98, 9/98, 10/12, 8/21, 12/21)
b. NCAA Automatic Qualifier.
The winner of the post-season Conference Tournament shall represent the Conference in the NCAA Division I Baseball Tournament. (12/21)
c. Conference Schedule.
The Conference schedule shall begin 11 weeks prior to the start of the Conference Tournament. Each team
shall schedule one three-game series against each other team in the Conference. Only these games shall
count in the Conference standings. (8/98, 10/10)
All games shall be scheduled for nine innings. Single games shall be scheduled on Friday, Saturday, and
Sunday, except that no Conference games shall be scheduled on Easter Sunday. Any three-game series occurring during Easter Weekend shall be scheduled as single games on Thursday, Friday, and Saturday. The
final series of the season shall be moved to Thursday, Friday, and Saturday and other changes to the schedule may be made if they are mutually agreed upon by the two participating institutions. (1/87, 8/98, 12/13)
A series may be scheduled to begin on the Friday that final examinations end provided the institution
completing those final examinations is scheduled to play at home. Otherwise, no games shall be scheduled
during final examinations week or other periods of conflict with academic schedules, and play shall start
whenever necessary to accommodate this provision. Conference games shall take priority over non-Conference games. Mutual agreement by institutions to create open weekends for non-Conference play shall
occur only after the Conference schedule has been created. (5/82, 11/84, 6/92, 12/92, 6/95, 12/96, 8/98,
10/10, 10/11)
(1) Rescheduling Policies.
(a) Extension of Series.
A Conference series may only be extended by one day if two official games are not completed during the scheduled three-day series. (8/98, 12/14)
(b) Priority of Contests.
Extension of a regularly scheduled Conference series to a fourth day shall take priority over a postponed or halted game which must be rescheduled using the policies outlined in sections (c) and
(d) below. (2/99)
(c) Postponed Game.
If a scheduled game never begins due to inclement weather, darkness, light failure, curfew or other
reasons, it shall be considered a postponed game. Inclement weather shall include a temperature
that has dropped below 32 degrees Fahrenheit (or wind chill of 25 degrees Fahrenheit). The home
team shall make Internet resources indicating the local temperature available to the umpires to
use as a reference regarding weather conditions. If a game is postponed during a series between
2022-23 Handbook • Page 96

Baseball Regulations

SPR 1-1-c-(1)

SPR 1-1-d

traditional rivals, the contest shall be rescheduled on a date mutually agreed upon by the competing institutions. A postponed game may be rescheduled as a single game if significant additional
travel costs are not incurred by the visiting team and no additional class time is missed by either
of the competing teams. If the postponed game cannot be rescheduled under these parameters, the
following policies shall be applied: (12/92, 12/93, 8/98, 2/00, 10/12)
i. If the game on the first day of a three-day series is postponed, it shall be rescheduled as one
of two games for the second day. If a game is postponed on the second day of a series, it shall
be rescheduled as one of two games for the third day. Postponed games which are rescheduled
as a doubleheader may have a separate admission charge for each game.
ii. If at the conclusion of the third day, a game(s) remains to be played, the series shall be extended to a fourth day. The visiting team shall not be required to remain in the area of the game
site if the competing institutions mutually agree that weather conditions are such that the field
will be unplayable beyond the third day. (4/90, 4/91, 6/96, 8/98)
iii. If a game(s) scheduled between Team A (visitor) and Team B (home) is postponed and
cannot be rescheduled under paragraphs i, and ii above, and Team A is traveling to the area
of Team B to play a series against Team B’s traditional rival (Team C), a maximum of one
game between Teams A and B shall be played at Team B’s site on the day following the regularly scheduled series between Teams A and C. The roster for Team A for the postponed game
against Team B shall be identical to the traveling roster for the series against Team C. The roster for Team B for the postponed game against Team A shall be identical to the roster for the
Conference series immediately preceding the rescheduled postponed game. An exception to
this rule shall be if either team is in final examinations week or if one of the teams is playing a
three-game Conference series while the other is not, in which case the postponed game shall
not be played at that time and site. (2/99, 3/12)
iv. If a postponed game cannot be rescheduled using the provisions of i, ii, and iii above, the
Commissioner, in consultation with the directors of athletics or designated administrative representatives (non-coaches) of the involved institutions, will determine the date and site for the
game. (1/87, 4/91, 8/98, 2/99)
(d) Halted Game.
i. If a game is stopped due to inclement weather, darkness, light failure, or curfew before
nine innings are completed and if one team leads by 12 or more runs after at least seven full
innings of play (or if the home team leads by 12 or more runs after six and one-half innings), it
shall be ruled a completed game and shall not be resumed. (11/81, 8/98)
ii. If a game is stopped due to inclement weather, darkness, light failure, or curfew before
nine innings are completed and if neither team leads by 12 or more runs after at least seven
full innings of play (or if the home team does not lead by 12 or more runs after six and one-half
innings), it shall be ruled a halted game. Games which are tied when play is halted shall be
considered halted games. (11/81, 8/98)
(i) If a game is halted during a series between traditional rivals, it shall be resumed on a
date mutually agreed upon by the competing institutions. (12/93, 8/98)
(ii) If a game is halted during a series between teams that are not traditional rivals, it shall
be resumed the following day prior to any scheduled contest unless the game was halted
on the fourth day of the series. If the game was halted on the third day of the series it shall
be ruled a completed game if the specifications in Rule 5-8 of the NCAA Baseball Playing
Rules are met. (6/93, 12/93, 6/94, 8/98, 2/99, 10/12, 12/13)
(iii) If a halted game cannot be rescheduled using the provisions outlined in (i) and (ii)
above and has no bearing upon the Conference championship, it shall be “no contest”
2022-23 Handbook • Page 97

Baseball Regulations

SPR 1-1-d

SPR 1-3-b-(3)

and not made up. If the contest does have a bearing on the Conference championship, the
Commissioner, in consultation with the directors of athletics or designated administrative
representatives (non-coaches) of the involved institutions, will determine the date and site
for the game. (2/99)
2. Conference Championships.
a. Competition Site.
The Conference Baseball Tournament Championships shall meet all relevant NCAA automatic qualification requirement. The team tournament will be conducted as an eight team double-elimination competition. (7/22)
b. Competition Date.
The Conference Baseball Tournament Championships shall take place on Wednesday through Sunday the
final week of the regular season. (7/22)
c. Maximum Effort.
Per AR 4-4, Conference members are expected to compete in Conference championships in sports they
sponsor, and coaches are expected to attempt to field their strongest team to compete in single site Conference championships. (7/22)
d. Squad Size.
There shall be a squad size limit of 30 for the Conference Tournament. (7/22)
3. Game Policies.
a. Competition Site.
All Conference games are to be played on the field of the scheduled home team, except by mutual agreement of the athletics administration of the competing teams. (11/81, 8/98)
b. Playing Rules.
Games shall be conducted under the NCAA Baseball Playing Rules, except as modified below. (6/92, 8/98)
(1) Bat Testing.
All bats to be used in a Conference series shall undergo barrel compression testing prior to the first
game of each series with both teams having the option to observe the testing process. (12/17)
(2) Bench Jockeying.
No comments of any kind may be directed at the opposing team. The Conference office shall notify the
umpires that this rule is to be strongly enforced. (6/91, 8/98)
(3) Doubleheaders.
Each game of a Conference doubleheader shall be scheduled for nine innings. The length of time between games of a split doubleheader shall be limited to a minimum of 30 minutes and a maximum of
60 minutes to be determined at the discretion of the home team. (11/84, 12/92, 8/98)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 98
Updated 7/1/22

SPR 1-3-b-(4)

Baseball Regulations

SPR 1-3-e

(4) Field Side Monitors.
A replay system shall be available on monitors in the venue for use by game officials under the playing
rules. (7/22)
(5) Game Ball.
Baseballs used for Conference play shall meet the specifications established by the NCAA Baseball
Committee. The official ball used for all Conference contests shall be manufactured by Rawlings.
(11/88, 8/98, 4/01)
(6) Official Scorer.
The official scorer shall be designated by the home team and shall be seated in the press box. The official scorer is responsible for providing the visiting team a copy of the official box score. (5/70, 4/85,
6/92, 12/92, 8/98)
(7) Pitch Clock.
Two pitch clocks are required and shall be positioned on the outfield scoreboard (or atop the outfield
fence) and in a location placed evenly between the home and visiting dugouts. The clocks shall be readily visible to the pitcher, batter, catcher, and home plate umpire. (10/10, 12/19)
(8) Protests.
If a protest is filed in accordance with the NCAA Baseball Rules, the plate umpire shall notify the
Conference Umpire Coordinator immediately following a protested game. In consultation with the
Commissioner, a course of action will be determined using the NCAA Baseball Rules Book, the rules
of organized baseball, precedents from baseball and other sports decisions, and Conference policies.
(4/67, 5/69, 6/92, 8/98, 10/12)
(9) Time Limit.
If the visiting team is traveling by commercial air, a time limit (minimum four hours) from the scheduled start time shall be established, with no new inning beginning after the time limit. If a regulation
game (per NCAA rules) has been played when the time limit is reached and one team holds a lead, it
shall be declared an "official game". If a tie exists when the time limit is reached, the visiting team may
leave the competition site, and the game will end in a tie. (10/03, 10/04, 10/05, 10/12, 12/13, 12/14)
c. Pre-Game Protocol.
The home team shall make its batting cages available exclusively to the visiting team during the visiting
team’s allocated 40-minute batting-practice time and shall provide batting-cage balls. There shall be a minimum of ten minutes for the visiting team to warm-up between the allocated time in the batting cages and
the time designated for the visiting team’s infield/outfield warm-up. The visiting team’s infield/outfield
time shall begin no later than 25 minutes before the scheduled start time. (10/08. 10/11)
d. Scouting Reports.
A Conference baseball coach shall not send film or videotape or give a written or verbal scouting report on
a Conference member to any institution outside the Conference. (8/98)
e. Sportsmanship Advisory.
Prior to the first game of each Conference series, the umpire-in-chief shall present the coaches and captains
of the competing teams with the following sportsmanship advisory: (11/96, 8/98)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 99
Updated 7/1/22

SPR 1-3-e

Baseball Regulations

SPR 1-4

The members of the Conference value quality competition for their student-athletes, fair play, and good
sportsmanship. Accordingly, during this series players may not engage in verbal abuse of opponents or
other acts of poor sportsmanship. The Conference has directed that any such conduct is to result in the immediate ejection of an offending player from the game in which it occurs. The Conference will review any
such incident to determine whether additional penalties are warranted. (11/96, 8/98)
f.

Squad and Bench Limits.

In the sport of baseball, visiting teams may travel up to 30 student-athletes when an institution participates in Conference and non-conference play during the same road trip. If an institution is participating in
multiple non-conference games during the road trip they may submit a waiver to the Conference office to
increase the travel roster size beyond 30 student athletes. Only 27 student-athletes designated to compete
may participate in the Conference series. (7/22)
For games that do not involve traditional rivals, each team shall designate 27 student-athletes who may
compete in a given Conference series. The visiting team’s travel squad shall consist of these 27 studentathletes. These 27 student-athletes shall be included in the limit of 35 individuals who may be in the visiting
team dugout or other visiting team area during a game. The home team may have an unlimited number
of student-athletes and other team personnel in the home team dugout or other home team area during a
game, but only the 27 student-athletes designated to compete may participate in the series. (12/76, 11/79,
5/82, 5/83, 4/85, 6/92, 12/95, 6/96, 8/98, 6/01, 10/03, 10/05, 6/07, 10/07, 6/09, 10/09, 10/10)
For games that involve traditional rivals, there shall be no student-athlete squad limit for either team. Each
team may have an unlimited number of student-athletes who may play and other team personnel in its
dugout or other team area during a game. (12/76, 11/79, 5/82, 5/83, 4/85, 6/92, 12/95, 6/96, 8/98, 6/01,
10/03, 10/05, 6/07, 10/07, 10/10)
(1) Lineup Cards.
Standardized lineup cards which include space for the 27-man rosters shall be used in Conference
games, with the lineup card to be provided to the umpire-in-chief and opposing coach each day of the
series. (5/83, 12/95, 8/98, 10/10)
(2) Other Personnel.
Team personnel not included in the bench limit must leave the field of play, including dugouts, bullpens, and batting cages, at least five minutes prior to the game(s). (8/98, 10/07)
g. Starting Time.
Non-televised game times shall be set by the home team. The game(s) played on the final day of the series
shall be scheduled to begin no later than 1:00 p.m. (6/91, 9/97, 8/98, 12/13)
h. Tickets for Professional Scouts.
Scouts for professional baseball teams may not be provided complimentary admission to games. They may
purchase tickets only for the general seating area. (6/92, 8/98)
i.

Umpire Policies.

See AR 6 and AR 6-14.
4. Awards.
The Conference baseball coaches shall select recipients for all Conference awards. Coaches shall not be allowed
to vote for themselves or for their own players for any of the awards. (6/92, 8/98)
2022-23 Handbook • Page 100
Updated 7/1/22

SPR 1-4-a

Baseball Regulations

SPR 1-5

a. All-Conference Team.
The all-Conference team shall consist of 32 players (three starting pitchers, three infielders, three outfielders, two relief pitchers, one catcher, one first baseman, a designated hitter, and 18 others at any position)
and each shall be provided an award from the Conference. Players who are nominated for the all-Conference team and receive at least one vote shall be accorded honorable mention in a Conference media release.
(6/92, 8/98, 2/99, 10/05, 6/07, 10/10. 12/13)
b. All-Defensive Team.
The all-defensive team shall consist of nine players (one pitcher, one catcher, one first baseman, one second
baseman, one third baseman, one shortstop, and three outfielders). The defensive player of the year is automatically on the all-defensive team representing his position. Each shall be provided a certificate from the
Conference. (6/12, 12/14)
c. Individual Awards.
Individual awards from the Conference office shall be provided to the Coach of the Year, the Player of the
Year, the Pitcher of the Year, the Freshman of the Year, the Defensive Player of the Year, and the batting
champion in the Conference. The Player of the Year and the Pitcher of the Year need not be members of
the all-Conference Team. Balloting conducted for individual awards shall use a weighted voting method.
(6/92, 12/93, 5/97, 9/97, 8/98, 2/99, 10/00, 10/05, 6/11)
d. Individual Batting Championship.
In order to qualify for the Conference batting championship, an individual must participate in 75 percent of
his team’s games and have a minimum of 2.5 at bats per game played by his team. (12/95, 8/98)
5. Meetings of Coaches.
There shall be an annual fall meeting of the head baseball coaches with the date and site to be established by the
Conference office. The attendance of each head coach is mandatory. (5/72, 6/91, 6/92, 8/98, 10/07)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 101

Men’s Basketball Regulations

SPR 2-1

SPR 2-1-c

CHAPTER 2—MEN’S BASKETBALL REGULATIONS
1. Playing Season Policies.
a. Championship Determination.
The team with the highest won-lost percentage for all Conference games shall be the Conference champion.
This shall apply even in the event one or more teams cannot play their entire 20-game Conference schedule.
If that percentage is shared by more than one team, a co-championship shall exist. (6/92, 6/01, 6/08, 7/20)
b. NCAA Automatic Qualifier.
The winner of the post-season Conference Tournament shall represent the Conference in the NCAA Division I Basketball Tournament. (7/22)
In the event the Conference tournament has not begun and cannot be played, the automatic qualification
berth shall be awarded to the regular season champion. If two or more teams tied for the regular season
championship, the seeding procedures in place for the Conference Tournament shall be used, and the number one seed shall receive the berth the Conference received through automatic qualification. In the event
the Conference Tournament has begun, but cannot be played to completion, the automatic qualification
berth shall be awarded to the highest seeded team remaining in the Conference Tournament at the time of
cancellation. (6/08)
c. Non-Conference Scheduling Requirement.
Each institution shall play a non-conference schedule that has a five-year trailing average of opponents’
NCAA Evaluation Tool (NET) of 175 or better starting with the 2020-21 academic year. This NCAA NET
average shall be calculated as follows: (7/19)
(1) The five-year trailing NCAA NET average available when the game contract is signed by both
parties (i.e. available Selection Sunday of the season prior to execution of the game contact), (7/19)
or
(2) The five-year trailing NCAA NET average available immediately prior to the game (i.e. available Selection Sunday of the season prior to the game), whichever is more beneficial to the institution. For an opponent reclassifying to Division 1, only the year(s) where the opponent has an
available NCAA Net average would be utilized. (7/19)
[NOTE: NCAA NET rankings started with the 2018-19 academic year. A blended ranking of KenPom/NCAA NET shall be utilized until five years of NCAA NET rankings have been generated.
The staff shall review annually through the 2022-23 season whether KenPom remains the best
proxy metric for the NCAA NET for purpose of determining the five-year trailing average of opponents, or whether a different metric should be used as a proxy for the NET in years previous to
2018-19.] (7/19)
Additional NCAA NET calculations for multi-team events (MTE’s) shall be as follows:
(3) The five-year trailing NCAA NET average of all teams in the tournament (7/19),
or
(4) The five-year trailing NCAA NET average of the known opponent(s) and the average of the
potential opponents, whichever is more beneficial to the institution. (7/19)
In addition, the following parameters also shall apply to non-conference scheduling:
(5) Pac-12 non-conference competitions shall be limited to only NCAA Division I opponents.
(6/17)
2022-23 Handbook • Page 102

Men’s Basketball Regulations

SPR 2-1-c

SPR 2-1-d

(6) There shall be no road games scheduled versus a non-conference opponent with a five-year
trailing average of 200 NET or worse. (7/19)
(7) There shall be no participation in a road game where the Pac-12 institution is provided a guarantee (i.e. a “buy” game). (7/19)
The official trailing average of the opponents’ NCAA NET will be calculated on the date the institution
submits its final non-conference schedule to the Conference prior to the season. (7/19)
If the above non-conference scheduling requirements are not met, the institution will be fined one (1)
NCAA tournament unit (~$280,000). The Commissioner shall have discretion to waive the 175 NET opponents’ ranking for an institution upon receipt of written appeal, signed by the Director of Athletics. (7/19)
d.

Conference Schedule.

Conference members shall be paired as a travel partner set (i.e., Arizona-Arizona State, California-Stanford,
Colorado-Utah, Oregon-Oregon State, UCLA-USC, Washington-Washington State). (6/12)
Each team shall play a 20-game Conference schedule, 10 home games and 10 away games. The Conference
schedule will be determined based on a 10-year rotation. (6/92, 6/11, 6/12, 7/20)
Each team shall play nine home games and nine road games over a ten-week period. Two games shall be
scheduled as a series each week, except that a game against a travel partner shall be the only game scheduled for that week. (6/92, 6/11, 6/12, 7/20)
Each team shall also play one home game and one road game in November and/or early December subject
to institutional academic calendars. (6/92, 6/11, 6/12, 7/20)
A road team’s games in a given week may be scheduled using any of the following patterns: WednesdaySaturday, Wednesday-Sunday, Thursday-Saturday, Thursday-Sunday. Sunday games may be scheduled to
accommodate departure by the road team via charter aircraft Sunday night. The following exceptions to
these patterns apply: (6/12)
•

No games shall be scheduled for the final Sunday of the Conference season. (6/12)

•

At least one travel partner set per week shall have its games scheduled for Thursday to ensure games
can be scheduled for Saturday. (6/12)

•

If the Conference Women’s Basketball Post-Season Tournament is scheduled for the Thursday through
Sunday of the tenth week of the men’s basketball Conference season, games may be scheduled on Tuesday of that week. (6/12)

A minimum of one day shall occur between games of a series. If a road team is required to play two games
with only one day off between the games, its opponent for the second game must also be limited to one day
off before that game. If a road team has two days off between two games, then its opponent for the second
game may have either one, two, or three days off before that game. (6/12)
Each team shall play its travel partner at home and on the road each season. The rotation of these games
from season-to-season shall not be adjusted, even if requested by a television partner. The remainder of the
contests shall be composed of games against (1) eight other teams both at home and on the road, (2) one
team at home, and (3) one team on the road. The annual opponent rotation shall be determined on a tenyear rotating basis. (6/12, 8/16, 7/20)
The order of opponents within a series will be alternated in a given season, and may be adjusted if requested by a television partner. The site of contests will be alternated from season-to-season, and may be
adjusted if requested by a television partner. [Example sequence: Year 1: A at C, A at D, D at A, C at A; Year
2: C at A, D at A, A at D, A at C.] If the order of opponents within a series is reversed the order of opponents
may be reversed for the other series involving those teams. (6/12, 8/16)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 103

SPR 2-1-d-(1)

Men’s Basketball Regulations

SPR 2-2

These scheduling parameters may be waived by the Athletics Directors Committee, but only by mutual
consent of the involved institutions. The initial Conference schedule and any changes to it shall be approved by the Athletics Directors Committee. (6/12)
(1) Rescheduling Policies.
It shall be the goal of the Conference to play each Conference contest to completion as scheduled. When
that becomes impossible, these policies shall be followed: (12/96)
(a) If the game is suspended during play, every effort should be made by game officials and game
management to continue it as soon as conditions allow, with the safety of the student-athletes and
spectators paramount in the decision of when it can be resumed. (12/96)
(b) In any situation in which a game has been suspended and is to be resumed, the participating
institutions should attempt to complete the game while the visiting institution’s team still is at the
site of the game to avoid the cost and loss of academic time required to make a second trip to the
game site. (12/96)
(c) If a Conference contest is suspended prior to play, or a suspended game cannot be continued,
such a game shall be rescheduled and replayed unless it has no bearing on the Conference championship or the possibilities of either competing team or any other Conference member for selection
for postseason play and it is mutually agreed by the two involved institutions to cancel the game.
Unless conditions prevent play, such a suspended contest should begin within 24 hours of the
original starting time. The host institution shall be responsible for securing an alternate facility for
the contest if the primary facility is unavailable. (7/92, 12/96)
(2) Practice Policy.
(a) Day Prior to Game.
The host institution may provide a practice site (preferably the competition court) or time to the
visiting team the day before any game. (12/84, 5/89, 6/92, 5/97, 6/12, 8/12)
If the competition court is unavailable for use by the visiting team, the alternative practice facility
must have a regulation size basketball court with glass backboards and must be within reasonable
travel distance from the competition site. (8/12)
An athletics department contact from the host institution shall be present during the practice session to assist the visiting team. (8/12)
(b) Day of Game.
The host institution shall provide a game-day practice time to the visiting team to begin no earlier
than 9:00 a.m., and to end no later than 1:00 p.m. A 60-minute period must be provided for this
game-day practice. The host institution shall confirm with the visiting team its practice time and
site no later than three days prior to the game. (12/84, 6/92, 5/97, 6/12, 8/14)
2. Conference Tournament.
All Conference members that are eligible for post-season play shall participate in the men’s tournament. The
winner of the Conference Tournament shall represent the Conference in the NCAA Division I Men’s Basketball
Championship. (6/01, 6/03, 6/05)
[NOTE: Additional Tournament policies may be found in the Conference Tournament Handbook.]

2022-23 Handbook • Page 104

SPR 2-2-a

Men’s Basketball Regulations

SPR 2-3-c-(2)

a. Maximum Effort.
Per AR 4-4, Conference members are expected to compete in Conference championships in sports they
sponsor, and coaches are expected to attempt to field their strongest team to compete in single site Conference championships. (7/22)
3. Game Policies.
a. Arena Microphone.
The arena microphone (as opposed to a special spirit group PA system) shall not be made available for
general or indiscriminate use by students in Conference basketball arenas. (5/72)
b. Band and Spirit Groups.
By mutual consent, visiting bands, not to exceed thirty (30) members excluding the director, shall be allowed only at Conference basketball games between traditional rivals. The band must be accompanied by
an adult staff member. The request by the visiting institution for such an agreement shall be made no later
than two weeks before the date of the contest. If such consent is granted, members of the band in uniform
shall be admitted to the contest at no charge. (5/79, 1/89, 4/90, 6/02, 8/13)
No bands may be seated behind or adjacent to the team bench in the sector defined by the sideline extended
and the half-court line. During timeouts, bands or components thereof may not be located immediately
behind or adjacent to the visitor bench. (5/79, 1/89, 4/90, 6/02, 8/13)
For Conference games, spirit groups that perform on the playing floor (e.g., uniformed cheerleaders, yell
leaders, mascots) may travel only to traditional-rival games, shall be limited to 12 individuals and the mascot, and must be accommodated by the host institution if requested. There shall be no limit on the number
of spirit group members for the host institution. All spirit group members may be admitted to Conference
basketball games at no charge. (1/89, 6/95, 6/05, 6/12)
The use of artificial noisemakers, airhorns, and all electronic amplifiers, except one bass amplifier used by
the band and a sound effects machine that is controlled by an administrator from the scorer’s table, shall be
prohibited at all basketball games. Sound effects machines and megaphones may not be used in any way
(e.g., pounding on the floor) as noisemakers while the game is in progress (including during free throw
attempts). Bands, announcers, and components thereof shall not play while the contest is in progress. The
home management is responsible for orientation of home rally and band groups and enforcement at all
home contests. (5/67, 4/86, 6/88, 4/90, 2/99, 6/03)
Only official student groups or spirit groups designated by the host institution may be on the playing floor
prior to the start of a game. (6/92)
c. Court-Rushing Policies.
(1) Institutional Security Plan.
Each institution must have a security plan in place to effectively prevent spectators from rushing the
court and/or throwing objects onto the playing surface. (8/15, 8/16)
(2) Failure to Prevent Court-Rushing Activities.
All court-rushing incidents are reviewed by the Conference. The Commissioner may (in his or her sole
discretion) impose discipline. In the event court-rushing activities occur within 60 seconds immediately following the end of a contest, penalties may be applied to include private/public reprimands
and/or institutional fines. Mitigating factors may include if the visiting team, staff members, working
personnel, and game officials safely exit from the court during the 60-seconds immediately following
the end of the contest. (8/15, 8/16, 7/22)
2022-23 Handbook • Page 105
Updated 7/1/22

SPR 2-3-c-(2)

Men’s Basketball Regulations

SPR 2-3-f-(4)

Institutional fines will follow an escalating penalty structure:
(a) A fine of $10,000 assessed for an institution’s first financial penalty.
(b) A fine of $25,000 assessed for an institution’s second financial penalty.
(c) A fine of $50,000 assessed for an institution’s third financial penalty.
(d) A fine of $100,000 assessed for an institution’s forth financial penalty. (6/17, 7/22)
d. Game Management Requirements.
A game management representative from the host institution shall be seated at the scorer’s table. If this is
physically impossible, the Conference’s basketball administrator may approve seating the game management representative in close proximity to the table. The representative should be identified to all game
officials and the visiting team’s head coach prior to the contest. The representative should have access to a
walkie-talkie, telephone, or other means of electronic verbal communications in order to promptly contact
other game management officials during the contest. (6/95)
e. Media, Equipment in Team Huddle.
Television camera personnel and still photographers and/or their equipment (e.g., cameras, microphones)
are not allowed in team huddles during timeouts. Television camera personnel may move off the baseline
during timeouts and shoot pictures from within the basketball keyhole on the floor. It is the responsibility
of game management to enforce this policy at each Conference institution. (5/84, 6/06)
f.

Officiating Policies.

See also AR 6, AR 6-11, and CER 4.
(1) Access to Dressing Room.
The dressing room for the game officials shall be made available 90 minutes prior to tipoff. No visitors
shall be permitted in the dressing room before the game with the exception of the game observer. (6/93)
(2) Pool Reporter for Officiating Interpretations.
Upon request from the media for a rules interpretation, a pool reporter will be selected by the home
sports information director of a Conference member for the purpose of obtaining that interpretation
from the chief of the officiating crew. After a ten-minute cooling-off period, the SID will accompany the
pool reporter to the officials’ dressing room. The officials may not be interviewed concerning judgment
calls. The chief official will address only the specific rule interpretation that was requested and shall not
answer questions about other officiating topics or game situations. (5/84, 7/19)
(3) Pregame Procedures.
The three game officials shall position themselves at midcourt throughout the pregame warm-ups and
avoid pregame contact with all coaches. Following the introduction of the starting lineups, the two
head coaches will meet to shake hands in front of the official scorer’s table and the three officials will
move to the table and shake hands with each head coach. Then they will promptly move back out onto
the court. (5/84)
(4) Support of Officiating.
Support of basketball officiating is required by the Conference (see CER 4) and bolstered by a specific
program of positive actions outlined in CER 4-5. (6/96)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 106
Updated 7/1/22

SPR 2-3-g

Men’s Basketball Regulations

SPR 2-3-h

g. Playing Rules.
Contests shall be conducted under NCAA Men’s Basketball Rules except as modified below. (6/92)
(1) Courtside Monitor.
The DVSport replay system shall be placed at the scorer’s table for use by game officials under the
playing rules. (6/04, 7/19)
(2) Ejection of Coach.
It shall be the responsibility of the coach to go to the locker room or remove himself/herself from the
arena (as per the playing rules) if ejected from the contest by the game officials. Failure to adhere to this
rule shall result in a review of the situation by the Compliance and Enforcement Committee with the
possibility that appropriate Conference penalties could be assessed. (Note: Game management would
provide the coach a security escort to the locker room, but would not be required to ensure that the
coach remained inside.) (6/93)
(3) Laser Pointers.
The first use of a laser pointer in an unsporting manner by a spectator shall result in a warning to the
crowd, and the second such use of a laser pointer shall result in a technical foul being issued by the officials against the home team. (2/99)
(4) Official Ball.
The seams on the ball for all Conference games shall be similar to those on the ball that is used in the
NCAA Championship. (6/94)
(5) Pre-game Activities.
The host institution shall develop and provide the pre-game countdown. There shall be no lights out in
the arena prior to :00 on the scoreboard clock during the countdown.
For all basketball games hosted by Conference member institutions, subject to receipt of the opponent’s
approval in a non-Conference game, team introductions shall begin with the visiting team’s starting
lineup followed by the home team’s starting lineup. Team huddles at midcourt any time prior to tip-off
are prohibited. “Senior Night” activities shall be scheduled for a time so that the visiting team is not on
the playing floor during the event. (4/90, 6/93, 6/95, 6/01, 6/02, 6/05, 8/06, 6/17)
(6) Timeouts.
All men’s basketball games hosted by Conference members shall use the NCAA Charged Timeout
policy for televised games. Teams may not conduct timeout huddles in the area inside the three-point
line. (5/81, 6/86, 6/89, 6/92, 12/92, 12/96, 6/02, 10/08)
(7) Videotaped Replays.
In any contest in which game officials have determined that a fight has occurred, the officials at the
time of the incident shall immediately review the video of the fight using the DVSport replay system
to determine that proper penalties as prescribed by the playing rules have been assessed. (6/91, 7/19)
h. Postgame Format for Coaches.
Following the completion of Conference games, coaching staff members from the two competing teams
shall exchange handshakes. (6/91)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 107

SPR 2-3-i
i.

Men’s Basketball Regulations

SPR 2-3-o

Replays on Electronic Boards.

The host institution shall be responsible for the content of the displays shown on electronic boards which
present video replays or messages, and must assure, in the spirit of the Conference’s rules on support of officiating programs, that such boards may not be used in attempts to embarrass or intimidate game officials.
(6/93, 12/14)
When an official game stoppage occurs for an official review in a televised game, the in- arena video boards
may show the unaltered television program feed at full speed (without audio) for replays of the play under
review. If the in arena video board cannot display the television feed, the in-arena video boards may show
a replay from its in-house system one time, unaltered and shown at full speed, and without audio. (12/14)
When an official game stoppage occurs for an official review in a non-televised game, the in- arena video
boards may show the same video feed (unaltered and shown at full speed and without audio) that it is
providing for the instant replay review. (12/14)
The in-arena video boards are permitted to show replays of non-controversial plays in a manner consistent
with good taste and sportsmanship. The in-arena video board should not be used to embarrass or intimidate an official or the visiting team. (12/14)
j.

Scorer’s Table Personnel.

The replay technicians shall be required to participate in a conference call arranged by the Conference staff.
The scorer’s table crew shall be required to view the NCAA basketball game day scorer’s operation tutorial
provided by the NCAA. (12/92, 6/95, 6/96, 7/19, 12/19)
k. Scouting Reports.
A Conference basketball coach shall not send film or videotape or give a written or verbal scouting report
on a Conference member to any institution outside the Conference. (5/85)
l.

Security Escort.

Each institution shall provide security officers to escort the game officials and the visiting team from the
dressing room to the playing floor and from the floor to the dressing room for each game. In addition, game
officials shall be escorted to their vehicles following games. (4/86, 6/96)
m. Sideline Apparel.
All ball persons who work at basketball games conducted at Conference sites must wear apparel provided
by the Conference office. (8/15)
n. Squad Limit.
Basketball squads for Conference games shall be limited to 16 players for the home team and 15 for the
visiting team, except there will be no limits on the number suited up for games between traditional rivals.
These limits apply to the travel party and to the number suited up by the home team. (9/67, 8/75, 1/76,
5/76, 12/94, 10/08, 6/09, 12/09)
(1) Bench Limit.
Only players, coaches, trainers, doctors, managers, and basketball staff personnel shall be allowed on
a team’s bench during Conference games. (5/70, 6/96)
o. Tickets for Visiting Institution.
See ER 1-6-a.
2022-23 Handbook • Page 108

Men’s Basketball Regulations

SPR 2-3-p

SPR 2-3-q-(1)

p. Tickets for Professional Scouts.
Institutional discretion shall be used for requests by scouts for professional basketball teams for admittance
to games. (6/92, 2/98, 6/98)
q. Video Policies.
A Conference institution shall have the right to film or videotape any game in which it is a participant. Institutions shall have an open exchange of video of all contests for scouting purposes via the internet. (10/08)
(1) Video Exchange Procedures.
(a) Each Conference institution shall upload all home games to Synergysportstech.com immediately
following the completion of the home contest. (10/08, 12/14, 8/15)
(b) The home team and the visiting team shall capture the TV broadcast with program audio at
the broadcast truck to avoid joined in progress scenarios. If one capture fails, the other will provide
the captured file immediately following the game. If both captures fail, the home video coordinator
shall alert the men’s basketball video coordinators group and contact the Conference office. The
Conference office will provide a digital copy for the home team to post on Synergysportstech.com.
(8/15)
(c) The official game exchange version posted to Synergysportstech.com will be a High Definition
(HD) .mp4 or .mov file containing the Television broadcast with program audio. (8/15)
(d) Exchanging the institution shot game video is considered optional and may be worked out
between institutions on a per-game basis; format and method of delivery shall be arranged by exchanging institutions. (7/19)
(e) Any institution wishing to make a DVD copy at the truck shall provide all associated hardware, software, cabling and media. The television truck will not provide a DVD copy of the game.
(8/15)
(f) For all Conference games, only the home institution shall upload the video file to Synergysportstech.com immediately following the completion of the home contest. (10/08, 12/14, 8/15)
(g) Each Conference institution shall upload all away non-conference games to Synergysportstech.
com within 12 hours of returning to campus. (10/08, 12/14, 8/15)
(h) If a non-conference game is not televised, the video coordinator shall upload a coach’s camera
version, in the highest video quality possible to Synergysportstech.com. (8/15)
(i) Each institution shall upload its most recent game to Synergysportstech.com before it may download the most recent game of its next opponent. (10/08, 12/14, 8/15)
(j) If requested, the home institution shall provide game video of the first game of a weekend
series to the visiting institution prior to those two teams meeting in the second game of a weekend
series. The visiting institution shall be responsible for making arrangements to acquire the game
video from the home institution via Synergysportstech.com. (10/08, 12/14, 8/15)
(k) Exchange of game video files between travel partners shall be permitted. (10/08, 12/14)
(l) All games uploaded to Synergysportstech.com shall be available for the duration of the season.
(10/08, 12/14, 8/15)
(m) If the preferred method (Synergysportstech.com) of electronic transfer of video files should fail,
institutions shall revert to the following procedures. The high-definition video content, in the highest quality digital format, for missing games is to be exchanged as soon as possible prior to the
scheduled contest using an alternate electronic method of transfer (Box.com, Dropbox, YouSendIt,
2022-23 Handbook • Page 109

SPR 2-3-(q)-(1)

Men’s Basketball Regulations

SPR 2-5

etc.) that the video coordinators agree upon. (5/85, 12/94, 5/97, 6/01, 6/07, 10/07, 10/08, 12/14,
8/15)
(n) For Conference Tournament competition, all institutions shall have the option to live capture
an HD Television broadcast with program audio of every game. Each institution is responsible for
all associated hardware, software, cabling, and media. (12/14, 8/15)
r.

Starting Time.

The participating institutions of each men’s basketball game must accept a start time proposed by the carrier of a Conference television program which is consistent with the terms of its contract with the Conference. (6/03, 12/13)
4. Awards.
The men’s basketball coaches shall select recipients for all Conference awards. Coaches shall not be allowed
to vote for themselves or for their own players for any of the awards. Coaches shall submit in rank order the
names of individuals from their team for all-Conference consideration by Monday prior to the conclusion of
the regular season. Ballots shall be distributed to the coaches by the Conference office on the Tuesday prior to
the conclusion of the regular season and returned to the Conference office by Sunday after completion of the
regular season. In order to maximize the publicity opportunities for student-athletes and the Conference, the
Conference staff has the authority to make additions to the list of recipients selected by the coaches for Conference honors. (6/92, 6/03, 6/17)
a. All-Conference Team.
The all-Conference team shall consist of a ten-player first team and a five-player second team and each
member shall be provided an award from the Conference. Players who are nominated for the all-Conference team and are not selected to the first- or second-team but received at least three votes, shall be accorded honorable mention in a Conference media release. (6/92, 2/99, 6/07, 6/08)
b. All-Defensive Team.
The all-defensive team shall consist of five players and each shall be provided a certificate from the Conference. Players who are nominated for the all -in a Conference media release. (6/07, 8/14)
c. All-Freshman Team.
The all-freshman team shall consist of five players and each shall be provided a certificate from the Conference. Players who are nominated for the all -reshman team and are not selected, but received at least three
votes, shall be accorded honorable mention in a Conference media release. (6/92, 6/07, 8/14)
d. Individual Awards.
Individual awards from the Conference office shall be provided to the Coach of the Year, the Player of the
Year, the Freshman/Newcomer of the Year, the Most Improved Player of the Year, Sixth Player of the Year,
and the Defensive Player of the Year in the Conference. Balloting conducted for individual awards shall use
a weighted voting method. (6/92, 6/07, 6/08, 8/17)
5. Meetings of Coaches.
There shall be two in-person meetings of the men’s basketball coaches each year with the dates and sites to be
established by the Conference office. The attendance of each head coach is mandatory. (5/82, 6/91, 6/92)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 110

SPR 3-1

Women’s Basketball Regulations

SPR 3-1-c

CHAPTER 3—WOMEN’S BASKETBALL REGULATIONS
1. Playing Season Policies.
a. Championship Determination.
The team with the highest won-lost percentage for all Conference games shall be the Conference champion.
This shall apply even in the event one or more teams cannot play its entire 18-game Conference schedule. If
that percentage is shared by more than one team, a co-championship shall exist. (6/92, 6/01, 6/08)
b. NCAA Automatic Qualifier.
The winner of the post-season Conference Tournament shall represent the Conference in the NCAA Division I Women’s Basketball Tournament. (7/22)
In the event the Conference Tournament has not begun and cannot be played, the automatic qualification
berth shall be awarded to the regular season champion. If two or more teams tied for the regular season
championship, the seeding procedures in place for the Conference Tournament shall be used, and the number one seed shall receive the berth the Conference received through automatic qualification. In the event
the Conference Tournament has begun, but cannot be played to completion, the automatic qualification
berth shall be awarded to the highest seeded team remaining in the Conference Tournament at the time of
cancellation. (6/08)
c. Conference Schedule.
Conference members shall be paired as a travel partner set (i.e., Arizona-Arizona State, California-Stanford,
Colorado-Utah, Oregon-Oregon State, UCLA-USC, Washington-Washington State). (10/12)
Two games shall be scheduled as a series each week on Friday and Sunday. Games may be moved from
the originally scheduled date by the Conference’s television partners. (1/87, 5/88, 12/88, 5/91, 6/92, 6/98,
6/11, 3/12, 10/12, 8/16, 8/21)
Each team shall play its travel partner at home and on the road each season. The remainder of the contests
shall be composed of games against (1) three other sets of travel partners both at home and on the road, (2)
one travel partner set at home, and (3) one travel partner set on the road. Contests against travel partner
sets shall be determined biennially on a ten-year rotating basis. (10/12)
The schedule shall be created annually to mirror the Conference men’s basketball schedule to the greatest
degree possible to limit facility conflicts. Except for reasons related to television or to the availability of the
playing facility, Conference games scheduled for Sunday shall have a starting time set to accommodate
departure by the visiting team on Sunday evening. (10/12, 12/13)
Excluding contests against the traditional rival, teams shall play as many different travel partner sets as
possible before facing a travel partner set for a second time in that season. (10/12)
Excluding contests against the traditional rival, no travel partner set shall play more than two consecutive
weeks on the road. Any travel partner set that plays two consecutive weeks on the road during a given
season should not be scheduled to play on the road during the last week of the season. A travel partner set
should not be scheduled to play two consecutive weeks on the road in consecutive seasons. (10/12)
Effective 2022-23, one of the travel-partner games shall move out of the traditional 9-week schedule, onto a
mutually agreed upon date in December. (7/22)
The order of opponents within a series and the site of contests shall be alternated from season-to-season to
the extent possible. [Example sequence: Year 1: A at C, A at D, C at A, D at A; Year 2: D at A, C at A, A at D,
A at C.] (10/12)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 111
Updated 7/1/22

Women’s Basketball Regulations

SPR 3-1-c

SPR 3-2

The initial Conference schedule and any changes to it shall be approved by the Senior Woman Administrators Committee. (10/12)
(1) Rescheduling Policies.
It shall be the goal of the Conference to play each Conference contest to completion as scheduled. When
that becomes impossible, these policies shall be followed: (12/96)
(a) If the game is suspended during play, every effort should be made by game officials and game
management to continue it as soon as conditions allow, with the safety of the student-athletes and
spectators paramount in the decision of when it can be resumed. (12/96)
(b) In any situation in which a game has been suspended and is to be resumed, the participating
institutions should attempt to complete the game while the visiting institution’s team still is at the
site of the game to avoid the cost and loss of academic time required to make a second trip to the
game site. (12/96)
(c) If a Conference contest is suspended prior to play, or a suspended game cannot be continued,
such a game shall be rescheduled and replayed unless it has no bearing on the Conference championship or the possibilities of either competing team or any other Conference member for selection
for postseason play and it is mutually agreed by the two involved institutions to cancel the game.
Unless conditions prevent play, such a suspended contest should begin within 24 hours of the
original starting time. The host institution shall be responsible for securing an alternate facility for
the contest if the primary facility is unavailable. (7/92, 12/96)
(2) Practice Policy.
(a) Day Prior to Game.
The host institution may provide a practice site (preferably the competition court) or time to the
visiting team the day before any game. (5/89, 6/12)
If the competition court is unavailable for use by the visiting team, the alternative practice facility
must have a regulation size basketball court with glass backboards and must be within reasonable
travel distance from the competition site. (5/89)
An athletics department contact from the host institution shall be present during the practice session to assist the visiting team. (6/95)
(b) Day of Game.
The host institution shall provide the visiting team a one-hour, game-day practice period from four
to seven hours prior to game time on the competition court. An institution that cannot comply with
this policy may request an exemption from the Conference office. (5/89, 6/89, 6/92, 12/94, 6/95,
6/04)
2. Conference Tournament.
All Conference members that are eligible for post-season play shall participate in the women’s tournament.
The winner of the Conference Tournament shall represent the Conference in the NCAA Division I Women’s
Basketball Championship. (6/01, 6/03, 6/05)
[NOTE: Additional Tournament policies may be found in the Conference Tournament Handbook.]

2022-23 Handbook • Page 112

SPR 3-2-a

Women’s Basketball Regulations

SPR 3-3-c

a. Maximum Effort.
Per AR 4-4, Conference members are expected to compete in Conference championships in sports they
sponsor, and coaches are expected to attempt to field their strongest team to compete in single site Conference championships. (7/22)
3. Game Policies.
a. Ball Persons.
Ball persons shall be provided by the host institution and, unless prevented from doing so by a preexisting
institutional agreement, shall wear clothing provided by the Conference. (6/96)
b. Band and Spirit Groups.
By mutual consent, visiting bands, not to exceed thirty (30) members excluding the director, shall be allowed only at Conference basketball games between traditional rivals. The band must be accompanied by
an adult staff member. The request by the visiting institution for such an agreement shall be made no later
than two weeks before the date of the contest. If such consent is granted, members of the band in uniform
shall be admitted to the contest at no charge. (5/90, 6/96, 6/01, 6/02, 6/06, 8/13)
No bands may be seated behind or adjacent to the team bench in the sector defined by the sideline extended
and the half-court line. During timeouts, bands or components thereof may not be located immediately
behind or adjacent to the visitor bench. (5/90, 6/96, 6/01, 6/02, 6/06, 8/13)
Visiting bands in attendance shall alternate performances with the home team’s band at each full-length
timeout. Should the home team’s band perform the national anthem, the visiting team’s band shall perform
at the first full-length timeout. The home team’s band would then perform during the second full-length
timeout. (12/96)
Spirit groups that perform on the playing floor (e.g., uniformed cheerleaders, yell leaders, mascots) shall
be limited to 20 individuals and may be admitted to Conference basketball games at no charge. For Conference games, such spirit groups may travel only to traditional-rival games and must be accommodated by
the host institution if requested. (12/89, 6/00, 6/12)
The use of artificial noisemakers, airhorns, and all electronic amplifiers, except one bass amplifier used by
the band and a sound effects machine that is controlled by an administrator from the scorer’s table, shall
be prohibited at all basketball games. Sound effects machines and megaphones may not be used in any way
(e.g., pounding on the floor) as noisemakers while the game is in progress (including during free throw attempts). Bands, announcers, and components thereof shall not play while the contest is in progress. (6/88,
5/90, 2/99, 6/03)
c. Game Management Requirements.
Pregame information, including parking, appropriate entry into the facility, practice times, etc., shall be
communicated in writing to the coach and the appropriate athletic administrator of the visiting team prior
to the game. A meeting room shall be provided for the visiting team one hour prior to the start of the game.
It shall be the host institution’s responsibility to provide adequate game management and security for the
game officials and the visiting team, including preventing public access to the areas near their locker rooms.
(6/87, 4/88, 6/92, 6/95)
A game management representative from the host institution shall be seated at the scorer’s table. If this is
physically impossible, the Conference’s basketball administrator may approve seating the game management representative in close proximity to the table. The representative should be identified to all game
officials and the visiting team’s head coach prior to the contest. The representative should have access to a
walkie-talkie, telephone, or other means of electronic verbal communications in order to promptly contact
other game management officials during the contest. (6/95)
2022-23 Handbook • Page 113
Updated 7/1/22

SPR 3-3-d

Women’s Basketball Regulations

SPR 3-3-g-(3)

d. Halftime.
The court shall be cleared and balls be available for team use with four minutes remaining in the halftime
intermission. (6/10)
e. Media, Equipment in Team Huddles.
Television camera personnel and still photographers and/or their equipment (e.g., cameras, microphones)
are not allowed in team huddles during timeouts. Television camera personnel may move off the baseline
during timeouts and shoot pictures from within the basketball keyhole on the floor. It is the responsibility
of game management to enforce this policy at each Conference institution. (6/06)
f.

Officiating Policies.

See also AR 6, AR 6-12, and CER 4.
(1) Pool Reporter for Officiating Interpretations.
Upon request from the media for a rules interpretation, a pool reporter will be selected by the home
sports information director of a Conference member for the purpose of obtaining that interpretation
from the chief of the officiating crew. After a ten-minute cooling-off period, the SID will accompany the
pool reporter to the officials’ dressing room. The officials may not be interviewed concerning judgment
calls. (4/88)
(2) Security Escort.
Each institution shall provide uniformed security personnel to escort the game officials from their
dressing room to the playing floor and from the floor to the dressing room before the game, at halftime,
after the game, and at other times upon request. (6/90, 6/92, 6/95)
(3) Support of Officiating.
Support of basketball officiating is required by the Conference (see CER 4) and bolstered by a specific
program of positive actions outlined in CER 4-5. (6/96)
g. Playing Rules.
Contests shall be conducted under NCAA Women’s Basketball Rules except as modified below. (6/92)
(1) Courtside Monitor.
A courtside monitor shall be required at all games hosted by Conference member institutions. (6/10)
(2) Ejection of Coach.
It shall be the responsibility of the coach to go to the locker room or remove himself/herself from the
arena (as per the playing rules) if ejected from the contest by the game officials. Failure to adhere to this
rule shall result in a review of the situation by the Compliance and Enforcement Committee with the
possibility that appropriate Conference penalties could be assessed. (Note: Game management would
provide the coach a security escort to the locker room, but would not be required to ensure that the
coach remained inside.) (6/93)
(3) Laser Pointers.
The first use of a laser pointer in an unsporting manner by a spectator shall result in a warning to the
crowd, and the second such use of a laser pointer shall result in a technical foul being issued by the officials against the home team. (2/99)
2022-23 Handbook • Page 114

Women’s Basketball Regulations

SPR 3-3-g-(4)

SPR 3-3-i

(4) Official Ball.
The official ball for all Conference games shall be the top of the line of the chosen brand, shall be composed of leather, and shall have seams similar to those on the ball that is used in the NCAA Championship.
(5) Team Introductions.
Pregame team introductions for all basketball games hosted by Conference member institutions, subject to receipt of the opponent’s approval in a non-Conference game, shall begin with the visiting team’s
starting lineup followed by the home team’s starting lineup. (6/91, 6/93)
(6) Timeouts.
For all women’s basketball games hosted by Conference members, media timeouts shall occur at the
times indicated by the NCAA Playing Rules. All timeouts, whether charged to the teams or to the media, shall be of full duration (i.e., not shortened by the team which called the timeout leaving its huddle
before the first horn). Teams may not conduct timeout huddles in the area inside the three-point line.
These procedures also shall apply to games involving Conference teams in regular-season tournaments
hosted by member institutions. (12/89, 6/98, 10/08, 6/12, 6/17)
(7) Videotaped Replays.
In any contest in which game officials have determined that a fight has occurred and courtside videotape replay equipment is available, the officials at the time of the incident shall immediately review the
videotape replay of the fight to determine that proper penalties as prescribed by the playing rules have
been assessed. (6/91)
h. Pre-Game Warm-Up.
The court shall be available for warm-up no less than 60 minutes prior to the start of the game, except for
doubleheaders when 30 minutes shall be made available for warm-up between games. The visiting team
shall be provided with a minimum of six leather basketballs with the same specifications as the game ball.
The following pre-game timing countdown shall be used for all games: (6/93)
Time to
Tip-off
60:00
15:30
15:00
3:30
3:00
0:00
i.

Scoreboard
Clock
57:00
12:30
12:00
0:30
0:00
10:00

Action
Scoreboard clock starts
Horn for National Anthem
National Anthem
Horn to clear floor
Player introductions
Tip-off
(6/93, 6/02, 6/04, 6/11, 8/15)

Replays on Electronic Boards.

The host institution shall be responsible for the content of the displays shown on electronic boards which
present video replays or messages, and must assure, in the spirit of the Conference’s rules on support of officiating programs, that such boards may not be used in attempts to embarrass or intimidate game officials.
(6/93, 12/14)
When an official game stoppage occurs for an official review in a televised game, the in- arena video boards
may show the unaltered television program feed at full speed (without audio) for replays of the play under
review. If the in-arena video board cannot display the television feed, the in-arena video boards may show
a replay from its in-house system one time, unaltered and shown at full speed, and without audio. (12/14)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 115

SPR 3-3-i

Women’s Basketball Regulations

SPR 3-3-l

When an official game stoppage occurs for an official review in a non-televised game, the in- arena video
boards may show the same video feed (unaltered and shown at full speed and without audio) that it is
providing for the instant replay review. (12/14)
The in-arena video boards are permitted to show replays of non-controversial plays in a manner consistent
with good taste and sportsmanship. The in-arena video board should not be used to embarrass or intimidate an official or the visiting team. (12/14)
j.

Scorer’s Table Personnel.

A public address announcer shall be required for all Conference games. Seating adjacent to the official
scorer shall be provided for a scorer from the visiting team. Scorer’s table personnel shall meet with the
game officials 45 minutes prior to tipoff and shall be present at the table at least 14 minutes prior to tipoff.
The scorer’s table crew shall be encouraged to view the videotape of the playing rules videoconference
provided by the NCAA. (6/93, 6/95)
k. Scouting.
For in-season competition, no video, verbal, or written scouting report on any team shall be communicated
to non-Conference institutions. (12/86)
Each Conference institution shall upload all non-Conference games to Synergysportstech.com no later than
midnight local time the day of the game for home games and within 24 hours of returning to campus for
away games. Each Conference institution shall upload all Conference home games to Synergysportstech.
com no later than 9:00 a.m. local time on the day following completion of the second game of the weekend.
There shall be an open exchange of all video and any game which is uploaded shall be available to any
institution as soon as it is uploaded. All games uploaded to Synergysportstech.com shall be available for the
duration of the season. Exhibition games are not required to be uploaded. (12/86, 5/89, 6/90, 12/94, 6/95,
6/01, 6/04, 6/06, 6/08, 6/09, 6/11, 8/13, 8/15)
Video posted to Synergysportstech.com must adhere to the following requirements: (6/11)
(1) All ten players must be included in each frame when filming a settled, quarter-court offense. (6/11)
(2) The camera shall be located at an elevated position at or near half court. (6/11)
(3) TV feeds or video board program feeds may not be substituted for the scouting camera feed. (6/11)
(4) Ambient or natural sound is required; radio announcers or a media broadcast are not permitted.
(6/11)
(5) Video must be shot in High Definition (HD). (6/11, 8/15)
(6) Non-game action (i.e., halftime or timeouts) shall not be included on the video. Video should stop
when the timeout is granted by the official, after a 10-second image of the scoreboard is shown. To help
ensure no game action is missed, video should resume when 0:30 remains in the timeout or at halftime.
(6/11)
For postseason competition, exchange of video, verbal, and written scouting reports shall conform to
NCAA policy. (12/86, 6/04, 8/15)
l.

Sideline Apparel.

All ball persons who work at basketball games conducted at Conference sites must wear apparel provided
by the Conference office. (8/15)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 116

SPR 3-3-m

Women’s Basketball Regulations

SPR 3-4-c

m. Tickets for Professional Scouts.
Institutional discretion shall be used for requests by scouts for professional basketball teams for admittance
to games. (12/96, 2/98, 2/99)
n. Tickets for Visiting Institution.
See ER 1-6-a.
o. Uniforms.
The home team shall wear the light uniform and the visiting team shall wear the dark uniform. Any other
arrangements must be made with the opposing team prior to the competitive date.
p. Video Policies.
A Conference institution shall have the right to video and/or live log any game in which it is a participant.
The host institution shall provide the visiting institution with access to a live HD video feed during the
game as well as the option to obtain a digital HD .mp4 copy with sound immediately following the game.
The visiting institution is responsible for all hardware, software, and cabling surrounding live capture and
must provide a file storage device if it wishes to receive a copy following the game. DVDs will not be provided by the home team. (6/90, 12/95, 6/12, 8/15)
4. Awards.
The women’s basketball coaches shall select recipients for all Conference awards subsequent to the completion
of regular-season play. The voting procedure for all awards shall be based on a weighted ranking. Coaches shall
not be allowed to vote for themselves or for their own players for any of the awards on any first ballot. (6/87,
4/88, 6/91, 6/92, 6/09, 6/10, 6/11)
Coaches shall vote for the all-Conference team, Player of the Year, Freshman of the Year, and Coach of the Year
awards the day of the last Conference game. A second ballot, consisting of the top three vote-getters in the allConference voting, shall be used to determine the Player of the Year and the Freshman of the Year. That ballot
shall be issued the day after the last Conference game and shall be returned to the Conference office later that
same day. Coaches may vote for themselves and/or their players on these second ballots. The Conference office shall release the names of all award winners prior to the start of the Conference Tournament. (6/00, 10/01,
6/02, 6/03, 6/04, 6/09, 8/13, 6/17)
a. All-Conference Team.
The all-Conference team shall consist of 15 players, each of whom shall be provided an award from the
Conference. Players who are nominated for the all-Conference team and receive at least one vote shall be
accorded honorable mention in a Conference media release. (6/92, 2/99, 6/07, 6/08, 6/09)
b. All-Defensive Team.
The all-defensive team shall consist of five players and each shall be provided a certificate from the Conference. Players who are nominated for the all-defensive team and receive at least one vote shall be accorded
honorable mention in a Conference media release. (6/07, 6/08)
c. All-Freshman Team.
The all-freshman team shall consist of five players and each shall be provided a certificate from the Conference. Players who are nominated for the all-freshman team and receive at least one vote shall be accorded
honorable mention in a Conference media release. (6/92, 6/07, 6/08)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 117

SPR 3-4-d

Women’s Basketball Regulations

SPR 3-5

d. Individual Awards.
Individual awards from the Conference office shall be provided to the Coach of the Year, the Player of the
Year, the Freshman of the Year, the Defensive Player of the Year, the Sixth Player of the Year and the Most
Improved Player of the Year in the Conference To be eligible for nomination for Sixth Player of the Year, the
individual may not have started more than 25 percent of Conference games that season. (6/92, 6/07, 6/11,
6/18, 7/19, 8/21)
5. Meetings of Coaches.
There shall be one in-person meeting of the women’s basketball coaches each year with the date and site to be
established by the Conference office. The attendance of each head coach is mandatory. (5/82, 6/91, 6/92, 6/11)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 118

Women’s Beach Volleyball Regulations

SPR 4-1

SPR 4-3-b

CHAPTER 4—WOMEN’S BEACH VOLLEYBALL REGULATIONS
1. Playing Season Policies.
a. Championships Determination.
The team Conference champion in women’s beach volleyball shall be determined at a Conference championship tournament. (8/15, 1/18)
b. NCAA Automatic Qualifier.
The winner of the post-season Conference Championship shall represent the Conference in the NCAA Division I Beach Volleyball Championship. (7/22)
c. Conference Schedule.
Beginning with 2021-22 season, each member institution agrees to participate in regular-season competition annually. Sites and dateall s to be mutually agreed upon by the coaches at their annual meeting for the
following year. (8/15, 12/19)
2. Match Policies.
a. Playing Rules.
Regular-season competition shall be conducted under the USA Volleyball Beach Rules as modified by the
NCAA Beach Volleyball Rules. (8/15)
b. Scouting.
Conference coaches shall not send film or video or give written or verbal scouting reports on a Conference
team to any non-Conference institution unless required to do so by the Conference or NCAA Division I
Women’s Beach Volleyball video exchange policy. (12/18)
3. Conference Championships.
a. Date and Site.
The Conference Beach Volleyball championship shall take place on Wednesday through Friday one week
prior to the NCAA Beach Volleyball Championships. (8/16, 7/22)
Year
2022-23
2023-24
2024-25
2025-26

Host Institution
Stanford
Arizona State
California
Utah

2026-27
USC
2027-28
UCLA
2029-30
Arizona
(12/18, 7/20)

b. Format.
The Conference Beach Volleyball Championships shall include a team event only, and shall meet all relevant NCAA automatic qualification requirements. Competition shall be conducted under the USA Volleyball Beach Rules as modified by the NCAA Beach Volleyball Rules and/or NCAA Championship Rules.

2022-23 Handbook • Page 119
Updated 7/1/22

SPR 4-3-c

Women’s Beach Volleyball Regulations

SPR 4-3-j

The team tournament will be conducted as a double elimination competition not to exceed three consecutive days. (8/15, 6/17, 1/18, 6/18)
c. Expense Sharing.
The event management costs, Championships mementos, and travel expenses (airfare and ground transportation) for each team shall be shared equally by the competing institutions. The number of individuals
eligible for travel expense reimbursement is 12. (8/15, 8/16)
d. Lineup.
The lineup rule in effect for the NCAA Championships shall apply to the Conference team championship
tournament. Each team shall submit its lineup for the Conference championship, via email to the Conference liaison, by 12:00 p.m. on the Monday prior to the Conference championship. The liaison will send all
submitted lineups to the coaches for review by 5:00 p.m. on Monday. If necessary, at noon on Tuesday, there
shall be a lineup conference call hosted by the staff liaison. During this call, any team’s lineup that is challenged must receive a majority vote of the other coaches to be approved. A lineup not receiving majority
support shall be amended by the coach of that institution until it receives majority support. A team may not
change student-athletes once the coaches’ meeting has been adjourned. (8/16, 12/19)
(1) Fine.
A monetary fine shall be imposed for non-compliance with the deadline for lineup submissions. (6/17)
e. Match Completion.
In all duals of the Championship Tournament, once a team wins three matches, any other matches in progress shall be suspended. (6/18, 12/18)
f.

Maximum Effort.

Per AR 4-4, Conference members are expected to compete in Conference championships in sports they
sponsor, and coaches are expected to attempt to field their strongest team to compete in single site Conference championships. (7/22)
g. Game Ball.
The official game ball for Conference championship shall be that used in the NCAA Beach Volleyball Championship. (8/16)
h. Squad Limit.
There shall be a squad limit of 14 for the Conference Championship. (8/16, 7/22)
i.

Uniforms.

The higher seeded team shall wear a light uniform and the lower seeded team shall wear a dark uniform.
Any other arrangements must be made prior to the match by mutual agreement of the coaches. (8/16
j.

Video Exchange Policies.

Institutions shall utilize a conference-wide video exchange program through HUDL during regular playing
season. HUDL shall be used as the video exchange system at Conference beach volleyball championships.
(8/16, 7/20, 12/21)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 120
Updated 7/1/22

SPR 4-4-a

Women’s Beach Volleyball Regulations

SPR 4-5

4. Awards.
a. All Tournament Team.
Coaches shall select an All-Tournament team consisting of six pairs, and provide each member with an
award from the Conference. Allocation of members of the All-Tournament team shall be based on the final
team standings in the Pac-12 Tournament, and shall be identified by the coach of the respective team. The
Conference champion and the second place team shall each provide two pairs for the All-Tournament team;
the third and fourth place finishers shall each provide one pair. (8/16, 12/18)
b. All Conference Team.
The All-Conference team shall consist of 10 first team and 10 second team members. Coaches shall rank
their top 20 choices, indicating their first choice with 20 points, their second with 19 points, etc. The 10 players having the highest point totals shall be named to the All-Conference first team, and the next 10 shall be
named to the All-Conference second team. First team players shall be provided an award from the Conference. Second team players shall receive a certificate. Coaches may not vote for their own players. (8/16)
To be eligible for selection to the All Conference team, players must have competed in a minimum of eight
dates of competition, or 50% of the institution’s scheduled dual match contests. (12/18)
c. All-Freshman Team.
The All-Freshman team shall consist of five members (true freshmen). Coaches shall rank their top five
choices, indicating their first choice with five points, their second with four points, etc. The five players having the highest point totals shall be named to the All-Freshman team and each shall be provided a certificate
from the Conference. Coaches may not vote for their own players. (8/16)
d. Individual Awards.
Individual awards shall be provided to the Player of the Year, Freshman of the Year, the Coach of the Year,
and Pair of the Year. The Player of the Year shall be the player who accumulates the most points in the allConference team balloting. The Freshman of the Year shall be the player who accumulates the most points
in the all-freshman team balloting. Each coach shall list two choices for Coach of the Year and Pair of the
Year, with the first choice receiving three points and the second choice receiving one point. (8/16)
5. Meetings of Coaches.
There shall be an annual meeting of the beach volleyball coaches to be held on a date and time established by
the Conference office. The attendance of each head coach is mandatory. (8/15, 7/20)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 121

Men’s and Women’s Cross Country Regulations

SPR 5-1

SPR 5-3-b

CHAPTER 5—MEN’S AND WOMEN’S CROSS COUNTRY REGULATIONS
1. Playing Season Policies.
a. Championships Determination.
The team and individual Conference champions in both men’s and women’s cross country shall be determined at a Conference championship meet. (6/92)
b. Conference Schedule.
There shall be no required regular season Conference schedule in the sport of cross country. See also AR
2-2-a. (6/92)
2. Meet Policies.
a. Playing Rules.
Regular-season meets shall be conducted under the NCAA Track & Field/Cross Country Men’s and Women’s Rules. (6/92)
(1) Squad Limit.
There shall be no squad limits on regular-season competition. (5/76, 6/86, 12/88, 6/92, 6/95, 6/99,
10/02, 10/03, 6/09, 6/10, 12/13, 8/16, 12/17)
3. Conference Championships.
a. Date and Site.
The Conference Men’s and Women’s Cross Country Championships shall be conducted annually two
weeks prior to the NCAA Regional meet. The Championships site shall be selected on the following rotation basis: (12/73, 5/76, 5/83, 6/87, 6/92, 5/97, 1/00, 6/12, 12/13, 12/14)
Year
2022-23
2023-24
2024-25
2025-26
2026-27
2027-28

Host Institution
USC
Washington
Arizona State
UCLA
Colorado
California

Year
Host Institution
2028-29
Washington State
2029-30
Arizona
2030-31
Oregon
2031-32
Stanford
2032-33
Oregon State
2033-34
Utah
(10/04, 10/10, 10/11, 8/14, 8/15, 7/20)

An institution must declare its inability to host no later than the September coaches’ meeting one academic year
prior to the academic year it is scheduled to host the Championships. (10/08, 10/09, 12/14)
b. Entry Deadline.
Four weeks prior to the Pac-12 Conference Cross Country Championships, the host institution will print off
each school’s men’s and women’s roster from TFRRS. Coaches must insure their rosters are current at this
time. These rosters are then used to print bibs for every potential competitor.

2022-23 Handbook • Page 122

SPR 5-3-b

Men’s and Women’s Cross Country Regulations

SPR 5-4

A maximum of 15 entries per gender must be submitted to DirectAthletics (www.directathletics.com) by
10:00 am PDT the Monday before the Championships. Each institution’s competitive squad (10 runners
max) is limited to those entered at this time.
At the pre-race technical meeting, each coach will submit their men’s and women’s competitive team.
Coaches may submit as many as 10 for each gender, and take bibs and chips for all 10 from the meeting. The
maximum competitive squad size is ten per gender (12/73, 10/05, 2/17, 7/20, 8/21)
(1) Fine.
A monetary fine shall be imposed for non-compliance with the deadline for entry submissions. (6/17)
c. Maximum Effort.
Per AR 4-4, Conference members are expected to compete in Conference championships in sports they
sponsor, and coaches are expected to attempt to field their strongest team to compete in single site Conference championships. (7/22)
d. Playing Rules.
The Conference Championships shall be conducted under the NCAA Track & Field/Cross Country Men’s
and Women’s Rules. (5/76, 6/92)
(1) Course.
Parameters and guidelines outlined in the NCAA Track and Field/Cross Country Rule Book (rule 1-12)
shall be followed when designing and setting up the course. (12/76, 6/86, 6/89, 1/0, 12/17, 8/21)
(2) Squad Limit.
Each institution may travel a maximum of ten student-athletes per gender to the Pac-12 Conference
Cross Country Championships. (5/76, 6/86, 6/92, 10/02, 6/09, 8/09, 6/10, 12/13, 12/14, 2/17, 12/17,
7/20)
e. Results.
The host institution shall compile the results of the Championships and distribute copies to the Conference
office and all Conference cross country coaches and sports information directors. (5/76)
f.

Starting Time.

The period between the starting times of the men’s and women’s races shall be 60 minutes. In even years
the women will race first followed by the men. In odd years the men will race first followed by the women.
(6/99, 8/16)
4. Awards.
The Conference men’s cross country coaches shall select the recipient for the men’s cross country coach of the
year award. The Conference women’s cross country coaches shall select the recipient for the women’s cross
country coach of the year award. Head coaches and directors of cross country programs may designate another
coach on their staff for coach of the year honors. The head coach and/or nominee would vote on the recipient
of the award together. Coaches and/or nominees may not vote for themselves. Balloting shall be completed
the Monday after the conference championships. Coaches shall rank their top two choices for the men’s cross
country coach of the year and the women’s cross country coach of the year. The Conference shall award the
men’s athlete of the year and women’s athlete of the year to the top finisher of the Conference championships.
The Conference will present men’s freshman athlete of the year and women’s freshman athlete of the year to
2022-23 Handbook • Page 123
Updated 7/1/22

SPR 5-4-a

Men’s and Women’s Cross Country Regulations

SPR 5-5

the top finisher with freshman or redshirt freshman eligibility at the championships. (6/92, 6/00, 10/07, 12/14,
6/17, 12/19)
a. All-Conference Team.
The all-Conference team shall consist of the top seven finishers in the men’s and women’s Conference
Championship races and each shall be provided an award from the Conference. The eighth through fourteenth-place finishers in the Conference Championships races shall be accorded second-team honors and
shall be provided a certificate by the Conference office. (6/92, 2/99, 10/03)
b. Individual Awards.
Individual awards from the Conference office shall be provided to the Men’s Coach of the Year, the Women’s Coach of the Year, the Men’s Athlete of the Year, the Women’s Athlete of the Year, and to the Men’s
Freshman of the Year and the Women’s Freshman of the Year. An individual award from the Conference
office shall be provided to the top ten individual male finishers and top ten individual female finishers at
the Conference Cross Country Championships. (6/92, 2/99, 10/03, 6/07, 12/14)
5. Meetings of Coaches.
There shall be an annual meeting of the track and field and cross country coaches. The attendance of each head
coach of track and field or cross country is mandatory. The attendance of one other head coach is optional. Each
Conference institution shall have two votes, one each for the men and women’s programs. (6/86, 9/92, 2/00,
10/01, 10/02)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 124

SPR 6-1

Football Regulations

SPR 6-1-c-(3)

CHAPTER 6—FOOTBALL REGULATIONS
1. Regular Season Policies.
a. Ambulance, Medical Doctor.
The host institution shall have an ambulance and a medical doctor available at the site of each Conference
football game throughout the contest. (2/92)
b. Ball Persons.
Ball persons shall be provided by the host institution, with the visiting institution having the option to provide its own ball persons. There shall be two ball persons on each sideline, they shall be at least 18 years of
age, and shall wear clothing provided by the Conference. If the visiting team provides its own ball persons,
there shall be four ball persons provided by each team. If the visitor brings only two ball persons, the home
team shall provide two additional ball persons to serve the visiting team. A prospective student-athlete
shall not serve as a ball person. (12/91, 6/99, 6/00, 6/06, 6/07, 10/07)
c. Band and Spirit Groups.
The host institution’s spirit squad members and mascot (all in uniform) and the members of its marching
band and associated groups shall be admitted to the game at no cost and shall be permitted to perform at
the game in accordance with Conference rules. If the visiting marching band notifies the host institution by
July 1 prior to the season that it will attend the contest, it shall be provided up to 100 complimentary seats
for its use. In addition to the 100 complimentary seats, the visiting institution’s spirit squad members and
mascot (all in uniform) shall be admitted to the game at no cost. The visiting team’s band, spirit squad and
mascot shall be permitted to perform at the game in accordance with Conference rules. It shall be permissible, at the host institution’s discretion, to increase the number of complimentary seats for the visiting
marching band. The home team band shall not be located any closer to the visiting sideline than the goal
posts. (12/84, 2/92, 7/19)
Performance on the playing field shall be at the determination of home game management, which shall
attempt to extend usual courtesies to the visiting institution’s representatives. Bands performing at Conference football games shall be prohibited from playing from the time the offensive team breaks from the
huddle until the completion of that play. For no-huddle offenses, no band may play from the time the play
clock reaches 15 seconds or the offensive team is prepared to snap the ball (whichever comes first) until the
play is concluded. (12/84, 2/92, 7/19)
(1) Artificial Noisemakers.
Artificial noisemakers are prohibited at all games hosted by Conference members. However, special implements related to and used by the spirit groups of the participating institutions (e.g., UCLA
airhorn) shall be permitted. (2/92, 10/03)
(2) Field Clearance.
Cheerleaders, bands, spirit groups, and mascots are prohibited from coming onto the playing field at
Conference football games while play is in progress, and Conference referees shall not have discretionary authority in this area, as permitted by NCAA football rules. (5/83)
(3) Home Team Student Body and Band.
The home team student body shall not be located inside the 20-yard lines of the visiting team sideline.
The home team band shall not be located any closer to the visiting sideline than the goal posts. (8/13,
5/20)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 125

SPR 6-1-d

Football Regulations

SPR 6-1-e

d. Benches.
The home team bench shall be located on the opposite side of the field from the visiting team bench. (12/72,
8/13)
e. Conference Schedule.
Member institutions shall be aligned into a non-division single ranking 1-12.(10/10, 6/12, 7/22)
Conference competition shall consist of a nine-game schedule on a rotating basis. (10/62, 1/69, 12/76, 5/80,
12/80, 8/85, 12/89, 6/91, 6/92, 6/05, 10/06, 6/08, 10/10, 7/22)
Each team shall play four home games each season, and teams that host the contest against their traditional
rival shall play a fifth home game that season. The site of contests shall be alternated from season-to-season.
[Example sequence: Year 1: A at B, Year 2: B at A.] No team shall play more than two consecutive road
games in a given season and no team shall play three road games and have one bye in a four-week period.
Best efforts shall be made to avoid having an institution play four out of five games on the road. (6/12,
8/13)
Games between traditional rivals will be scheduled for the last weekend of the regular season or, if that
date is unavailable, as late in the season as possible. The California-Stanford game shall not be scheduled
during the week that includes Thanksgiving. (6/12)
Conference games may be scheduled during the first week of the regular season if doing so would prevent
a team from playing 12 consecutive weeks and provide a bye later in the season. (10/12)
A “special date” games is defined as a contest played on a day of the week other than Saturday. A total of
eight special date games shall be scheduled to be televised by FOX and ESPN, but only with the approval of
the Conference. Each institution shall host two special date games during every three year period beginning
in 2012 to be televised by FOX and ESPN. If additional special date games are scheduled to be televised by
the Pac-12 Network, they shall not count toward the FOX/ESPN hosting requirements. Institutions shall be
limited each season to one road weekday football game while classes are in session. (10/11, 6/12)
Teams that play a special date game on a Friday do not require a bye the week prior. However, a Saturday
road game shall not be scheduled the week prior to a special date Friday night road game. Teams that play
a special date game on a Thursday require a bye the week prior, except that if both teams played a home
game the prior Saturday, a bye may not be required, provided the two competing institutions agree. (6/12)
The following facets of the schedule shall affect all members over time: (6/12)
•

Schedule changes that move games between traditional rivals from the last week of the regular season;
and (6/12)

•

Playing a full season of 12 games without a bye. An institution whose schedule includes a 13th regularseason game at Hawaii that replaces a bye is not relieved of this requirement. (6/12)

•

If an institution takes the proactive measure to schedule a non-conference opponent as an off-set for
another non-conference game (e.g., Notre Dame) that is scheduled after the third (13-week season) or
fourth week (14 week season) of the season, that institution would be exempt from having to play 12
games in a row during the term of the ESPN/FOX agreements (through 2023 football season). A waiver
of SPR 6-1-c-(1) (Restricted Weeks) would be required to schedule such a non-conference game. (12/14)

These scheduling parameters may be waived by the Athletics Directors Committee, but only by mutual
consent of the involved institutions. The initial Conference schedule and any changes to it shall be approved by the Athletics Directors Committee. (6/12)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 126

Football Regulations

SPR 6-1-e-(1)

SPR 6-1-e-(3)

(1) Restricted Weeks.
Effective with agreements dated on or after October 7, 2010, non-Conference games may not be scheduled after the third week of any 14-week regular season. For any 15-week regular season an institution
may not schedule a non-Conference game after the fourth week of the season and a Conference game
may be scheduled in place of a bye that occurs during the first three weeks of the season if a nonConference game is scheduled for the fourth week. The Athletics Directors Committee shall have the
authority to waive these requirements. (6/12)
The institutions have agreed to use weeks 10-12 (14-week season) or weeks 11-13 (15-week season) to
play a non-conference game if coordinated through the Conference staff so as not to disrupt the drafting of the overall Conference schedule. This late-season non-conference scheduling during weeks 10-12
(14-week season) or weeks 11-13 (15-week season) would require a second Pac-12 institution (or additional pairs) to also schedule a non-conference game during the same week and would result in those
institutions playing a Conference game during the first three/four weeks of the season. Additionally,
one institution can schedule a non-conference game during the week in October when Stanford/USC
play at Notre Dame. This dynamic scheduling approach is intended to provide Conference members
with an option to better manage the balance of their competitive schedule. Conference members with
an option to better manage the balance of their competitive schedule. (6/12, 7/19)
(2) Non-Conference Home/Neutral Site.
The scheduling of a home or neutral-site non-conference football game within the Pac-12 footprint on
a day other than Saturday, or the move of a home or neutral-site non-conference football game within
the Pac-12 footprint off of a Saturday must be coordinated through the Conference office. (8/14)
The following procedures will be used to consider date-change requests:
(a) All requests must be received by the Conference office by March 15 a year prior to the season.
(b) After March 15, the staff will consult with television partners regarding the proposed changes
and to determine whether all of the requested moves can be accommodated.
(c) By April 15 the Commissioner will determine which game(s) may move to a day(s) other than
Saturday. The Commissioner will consider all relevant factors including contractual obligations,
input from television partners and prior years movement of games to days other than Saturday.
(d) On April 15, the institutions will be notified of the Commissioner’s decision and a public announcement of the date change(s) will be permissible.
(e) Requests to change playing dates after April 15 a year prior to the season will be considered,
but will require approval of the Conference television partners.
(3) Rescheduling Policies.
It shall be the goal of the Conference to play each Conference football game to completion as scheduled. If a game is delayed at the start or interrupted, the referee, after consultation with the two head
coaches and game management, shall determine how much time the teams shall be provided to warm
up prior to the start of play. A game hosted by a Conference institution that goes into overtime and is
subsequently called due to darkness prior to a winner being determined shall be a tie game. When a
game cannot be played to completion, these policies shall be followed: (10/96, 12/96, 2/98)
(a) If the game is suspended during play, every effort should be made by game officials and game
management to continue it as soon as conditions allow, with the safety of student-athletes and
spectators of paramount concern in the decision of when it can be resumed. (10/96)
i. If at all possible, if the game(s) has a bearing on the Conference Championship, the Conference’s representative in the Rose Bowl or College Football Playoff, any member institution’s
2022-23 Handbook • Page 127
Updated 7/1/22

Football Regulations

SPR 6-1-e-(3)

SPR 6-1-f-(2)

eligibility to participate in postseason play or its opportunity to gain the best possible bowl
berth, the game will be resumed at exactly the point of its suspension. (10/96, 10/06, 6/11,
7/22)
ii. If none of the provisions of paragraph i above are applicable, the game will be resumed at
exactly the point of its suspension unless the participating institutions agree not to resume the
contest. (10/96)
(b) If at all possible, a Conference game(s) which is suspended prior to the beginning of play
shall be rescheduled at a subsequent time if it has a bearing on the Conference championship, the
Conference’s representative in the Rose Bowl or College Football Playoff, any member institution’s
eligibility to participate in post-season play or its opportunity to gain the best possible bowl berth.
A suspended football game not meeting any of those criteria also will be rescheduled unless the
competing institutions agree not to reschedule the contest. (7/92, 10/96, 10/06, 6/11, 7/22)
(c) In any situation in which a game has been suspended and is to be resumed, the participating
institutions should attempt to reschedule the game to play it while the visiting institution’s team
still is at the site of the game (assuming it reached the game site prior to suspension) to avoid the
cost and loss of academic time required for it to make a second trip to the game site. (8/84, 7/92,
10/96)
(d) Any additional financial costs or obligations incurred by either institution in connection with
the suspension, rescheduling or cancellation of the suspended contest shall be borne equally by the
two involved institutions. (12/96)
(4) Commissioner’s Rescheduling Oversight.
In the event a contest(s) is cancelled, the athletics directors of the involved institutions shall work under
the oversight of the Commissioner to reschedule the competition(s). If the Directors cannot mutually
agree on a make-up date(s), the Commissioner shall set the terms of the rescheduling. Per AR 3-2 and
SPR 6-1-c, regardless of a determination by the athletics directors or Commissioner, all date changes
of football games between Conference members must be reviewed and approved by the ADC. (6/08)
f.

Credentials.
(1) Team Area Credentials.
Team-area credentials shall be limited to 50 in number (not including medical personnel) for each team.
Starting with the 2021 season, team medical personnel will not count towards the team sideline area
limit. Teams are allowed to have as many medical staff members needed to safety manage competition.
Medical staff members should have a distinguishable credential from those of the 50 team area credentials. (i.e. different color, designated sticker, etc.) NCAA football rules limit team-area credentials
to individuals directly involved in the game. Unauthorized personnel should not be issued team-area
credentials or be allowed in the team area. (5/21)
(2) Outside Team Area Credentials.
The visiting institution will be allowed 15 field-access credentials for use outside of the team area.
These credentials should be limited to mandatory working personnel or accompanied guests of the
institution’s president or athletics director.
No other individuals from either institution (except for media, ambulance, etc.) should be allowed
access to the sidelines during a game. Field-access credentials are not to be shared or exchanged. Fieldaccess credentials shall be delivered to the visiting institution no later than the Tuesday immediately
preceding the game. Home team credential use (except for working personnel) shall be limited to the
home team sideline; visiting team credential use shall be limited to the visiting team sideline. (6/12)
2022-23 Handbook • Page 128

SPR 6-1-f-(3)

Football Regulations

SPR 6-1-h

(3) Pre-Game Credentials
The host institution shall provide a minimum 15 pre-game field-access credentials to the visiting institution no later than the Tuesday immediately preceding the game. (6/12, 7/19)
(4) Credential Age Limit.
No person under the age of 18 shall be credentialed to be allowed on the sidelines, including the team
area, during the game unless performing an assigned game-related task. A child under the age of 18
who is functioning in a game administrative capacity in the team area must be in possession of one of
the team’s 50 team-area credentials. Pre-game and post-game sideline access by persons under the age
of 18 is permissible.
Other than children of athletics department staff members who are functioning in a game administration capacity, prospective student-athletes are not allowed on the playing field (i.e., on the sidelines or
behind the end zone area) while the game is being played or at halftime. (6/06, 10/08)
g. Electronic Video or Message Boards.
The use of electronic boards which present video replays or messages shall be permitted in Conference
football stadiums. The host institution shall be responsible for the content of the displays, and also must
ensure the boards are not used in a fashion that disrupts the game or creates a competitive disadvantage
to either team. (5/66, 9/88, 8/89)
Each institution’s football video board production shall include a minimum of four cameras and the capability to capture and record a minimum of four camera feeds, and have the capability to provide at least
four different camera views to the instant replay booth for review purposes if the game is not being televised. The expense to meet the minimums shall be the responsibility of the institution. (6/07, 10/07)
All noise emanating from a video or message board must stop when the offensive team breaks the huddle.
The person(s) who operates a video or message board is subject to the NCAA football playing rules. NCAA
football rule 9-2-1-b-5 stipulates that no noise shall be created that “prohibits a team from hearing its signals.” This rule shall be enforced by the game officials, who will first instruct game management that the
noise has a negative effect on the game and must be stopped. (2/00, 6/00, 6/08)
Once the referee signals that a play will be reviewed, the home production staff shall project the feed from
the instant replay monitor on all in-stadium screens. If the review involves unsettling content (injuries,
targeting reviews, etc.), the production staff shall use discretion and may opt to use a static image in place
of the replay monitor. The number of replays shown is unlimited provided that the instant replay monitor
feed is the source. No in-house camera replays shall be shown. Once the referee makes a final announcement regarding the outcome of the play in review, no further replays can be shown. (8/15)
If a technical issue occurs with the instant replay monitor feed, the home production staff may project the
television feed (ESPN, FOX, Pac-12 Networks) on all in-stadium screens. The number of replays shown
is unlimited provided that the television feed is the source. No in-house camera replays shall be shown.
However, if television goes to a commercial break during an official review, replays from in-house cameras
may be shown in stadium without limitation, provided that these replays are handled the same for plays
involving either the home or visiting team. (5/66, 9/88, 8/89, 12/14, 8/15)
h. Entrance Requirement.
When both teams refuse to enter the field first for the start of either half, the home team must be the first
to enter. At stadiums in which both teams must utilize the same tunnel for entering and exiting the field,
the teams should remain separated in that tunnel area. The team with its bench closer to the tunnel should
precede the other team upon exiting the field at the conclusion of the first half, and the losing team should
exit the field first at the conclusion of the game. The teams may agree to change the order for exiting the

2022-23 Handbook • Page 129

Football Regulations

SPR 6-1-i

SPR 6-1-k

field at halftime by mutual consent of the event managers of the two involved institutions prior to the start
of the season. (4/78, 6/93, 6/03, 10/03, 6/05, 6/06)
i.

Field-Rushing Policies.
(1) Institutional Security Plan.
Each institution must have a security plan in place to effectively prevent spectators from rushing the
field and/or throwing objects onto the playing surface. (8/15, 8/16)
(2) Failure to Prevent Field-Rushing Activities.
All field rushing incidents are reviewed by the Conference. The Commissioner may (in his or her sole
discretion) impose discipline. In the event field-rushing activities occur within 60 seconds immediately
following the end of a contest, penalties may be applied to include private/public reprimands and/or
institutional fines. Mitigating factors may include if the visiting team, staff members, working personnel, and game officials safely exit from the field during the 60-seconds immediately following the end
of the contest. (8/15, 8/16, 7/22)
Institutional fines will follow an escalating penalty structure:
(a) A fine of $10,000 assessed for an institution’s first financial penalty.
(b) A fine of $25,000 assessed for an institution’s second financial penalty.
(c) A fine of $50,000 assessed for an institution’s third financial penalty.
(d) A fine of $100,000 assessed for an institution’s forth financial penalty. (6/17, 7/22)

j.

Official Football Uniform Approval.

All new football jerseys to be used during the 2016 football season and thereafter must be sent to the Conference office for approval. The approval process will ensure that all jerseys comply with NCAA Playing
Rule 1, which states: (8/15)
(1) The jersey must have clearly visible, permanent Arabic numerals measuring at least 8 and 10 inches
in height front and back, respectively. The number must be of a color that itself is clearly in distinct
contrast with the color of the jersey, irrespective of any border around the number. (8/15)
(2) Teams wearing jerseys/numerals that do not conform to this rule will be asked to change into legal
jerseys before the game and before the start of each quarter until the jerseys are changed. Officials shall
charge a team timeout at the start of each quarter the illegal jerseys are worn. (8/15)
(3) All players of a team shall have the same color and style numbers front and back. The individual
bars must be approximately 1-1/2 inches wide. Numbers on any part of the uniform shall correspond
with the mandatory front and back jersey numbers. (8/15)
The new jersey(s) must be sent to the Conference office for review by November 15 of the year preceding the year in which the jersey is to be worn. (e.g., Team A wishes to wear two new jerseys in 2017, both
of those jerseys must be sent to the Conference office for review no later than November 15, 2016). The
Conference office will then respond with approval, denial or suggested alterations by December 15. Any
subsequent changes made to a jersey(s) due to a denial or suggested alterations must be re-submitted to the
Conference office by January 15. The design of all submitted jerseys shall be kept confidential. (8/15, 2/17)
k. Officiating Policies.
See also AR 6, AR 6-10, and CER 4.

2022-23 Handbook • Page 130
Updated 7/1/22

Football Regulations

SPR 6-1-k-(1)

SPR 6-1-l-(7)

(1) Pool Reporter for Officiating Interpretations.
Upon request from the media for a rules interpretation, a pool reporter will be selected by the home
sports information director of a Conference member for the purpose of obtaining that interpretation
from the chief of the officiating crew. After a ten-minute cooling-off period, the SID will accompany the
pool reporter to the officials’ dressing room. The officials may not be interviewed concerning judgment
calls. The chief official will address only the specific rule interpretation that was requested, and shall
not answer questions about other officiating topics or game situations. (6/88, 7/19)
(2) Support of Officiating.
Support of football officiating is required by the Conference (see CER 4) and bolstered by a specific
program of positive actions outlined in CER 4-5. (6/96)
l.

Playing Rules.

Conference games shall be conducted under the NCAA Football Rules and Interpretations except as modified below. (6/92)
(1) Auxiliary Down Box.
Home team management shall provide an auxiliary down box on the opposite side of the field from the
official chain gang. (4/78)
(2) Bandanas and Headbands.
Bandanas and headbands may not be worn during football games. However, elasticized skull caps may
be worn for safety reasons, provided the cap worn by each player on a team is of the same color, and
that color is the primary color of the player’s institution or black. (6/92, 9/98)
(3) Field Markings.
It is strongly recommended that no permanent lines marking field dimensions in other sports or activities be permitted on Conference football fields. (12/76)
(4) Goals.
Each goal shall consist of two white or yellow uprights extending at least 40 feet above the ground
with a connecting white or yellow horizontal crossbar, the top of which is 10 feet above the ground.
The inside of the uprights and crossbar shall be in the same vertical plane as the inside edge of the end
line. (6/08)
(5) Halftime Length.
The length of halftime for Conference games shall be 20 minutes. (6/06, 10/06)
(6) Instant Replay.
High-definition instant replay shall be used. (6/10)
(7) Jersey Colors.
The home and visiting teams may wear contrasting colored jerseys only in traditional rival games.
(6/09)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 131

Football Regulations

SPR 6-1-l-(8)

SPR 6-1-p

(8) Objects Thrown on Field.
If the referee interrupts a contest to have debris thrown from the stands removed from the playing
field, the public address announcer shall immediately request that spectators refrain from throwing
any additional objects onto the field which might cause the contest to be further interrupted or possibly
injure the players or other game personnel. The signal to the public address announcer to make this
announcement shall be the referee calling an official’s timeout. (9/03)
(9) Suspended Games.
See SPR 6-1-c-(2). (2/98)
(10)Team Area.
The team area for Conference football games shall be between the 20-yard lines. Only players in uniform, injured or non-participating student-athletes wearing their game jerseys, or a person wearing a
team-area credential, including coaches, shall be allowed in the team area. Such team-area credentials
shall be limited to 50 in number for each team (not including medical personnel) for each team. Starting with the 2021 season, team medical personnel will not count towards the team sideline area limit.
Teams are allowed to have as many medical staff members needed to safety manage competition.
Medical staff members should have a distinguishable credential from those of the 50 team area credentials. (i.e., different color, designated sticker, etc.) NCAA football rules limit team-area credentials
to individuals directly involved in the game. Unauthorized personnel should not be issued team-area
credentials or be allowed in the team area. (4/86, 12/88, 6/93, 10/08, 7/22)
m. Pregame Format and Warm-Up.
A pregame countdown sheet shall be provided in each team’s locker room. The use of the playing field shall
be confined to the participating football teams until 20:00 remains on the pregame clock, at which time the
teams will clear the field and the host institution may present its pregame show. The band(s) may not enter
the team areas until the teams have left the playing field. There shall be no waiver of the provisions of this
rule, including mutual agreement between the participating institutions. (11/86, 12/89, 12/91, 12/93, 6/99,
6/05)
A schematic of the team warm-up areas shall be provided in each team’s locker room. Kickers shall be
allowed to kick at both ends of the field until 60 minutes prior to kickoff. At 60 minutes prior to kickoff,
the field shall be divided into an “L-shaped” configuration with the 30-yard lines forming the “L”. At 40
minutes prior to kickoff, the field shall be divided at the 45-yard lines (leaving a 10-yard buffer zone for
the teams between the 45-yard lines) until the teams leave the field after warm-ups. (12/89, 12/91, 6/95)
n. Prospective Student-Athletes.
Other than children of athletics department staff members who are functioning in a game administrative
capacity, prospective student-athletes are not permitted on the playing field area (i.e., on the sidelines or
behind the end zone area) while the game is being played or at halftime. See SPR 6-2-p. (4/86)
o. Security Escorts for Officials.
Uniformed police officers (not non-uniformed security personnel) shall escort football officials on and off
the playing field. These security officers should come from a point on the sideline near the officials, not the
end zone, to provide halftime and post-game security for the officials. (6/00)
p. Sideline Phones.
The home institution is responsible for the maintenance of sideline communication systems. The home
institution must make a minimum of five phone lines available for the visiting team utilizing the configu2022-23 Handbook • Page 132
Updated 7/1/22

Football Regulations

SPR 6-1-p

SPR 6-1-s-(2)

ration requested by the visiting team. The visiting team is free to bring in its own sideline communication equipment. If either sideline communication system fails, both teams will shut down their phones or
walkie talkies. This applies even if the visiting team brought its own equipment. Further, if there is a partial
breakdown that takes the total number of phone lines available to either team to less than five, both teams
will be limited to a like number of lines (e.g., Team A has a partial breakdown that leaves only three phone
lines operational. Team B must shut down all but three lines). (11/90)
The home institution shall provide the visiting team with the name and method of contact of personnel
charged with phone and headset repair at the stadium. (4/86)
q. Squad Limitations.
For Conference games not involving traditional rivals, the visiting team squad limit shall be 74 studentathletes. The home team shall have no squad limit, but only 74 student-athletes may be housed at a hotel
the night before the game. For Conference games involving traditional rivals, both the home team and
the visiting team shall have no squad limit and each may house up to 74 student-athletes at a hotel the
night before the game. The Council may approve waivers to this rule for games which involve unusual
circumstances (e.g., a game played in a foreign country which offers unique educational opportunities for
the traveling student-athletes). [Five-year moratorium (through 2023 football season) on consideration of
future increases to football travel squad.] (12/71, 12/73, 12/74, 8/75, 1/76, 5/77, 5/79, 5/85, 6/04, 8/04,
6/08, 6/10, 7/19)
r.

Starting Time.

The participating institutions of each football game must accept a start time proposed by the carrier of a
Conference television program which is consistent with the terms of its contract with the Conference. (6/88,
6/00, 6/03, 10/08, 7/12)
s. Ticket Policies.
(1) Visitors Ticket Allotment.
For all Pac-12 intra-Conference football games, the home institution shall make an initial allotment of
2,000 contiguous tickets available to the visiting institution. (6/05, 7/12, 11/16)
(2) Returned Tickets.
The majority of the remaining visiting institution’s tickets should be received by the home institution
eight (8) business days prior to the game. When a game is not sold out, 200 tickets may be returned by
the visiting institution four (4) business days prior to the game via overnight delivery, and tickets not to
exceed 80 may be returned to the host institution no later than 1-1/2 hours prior to game time. Within
three business days after receiving written notification of the host institution’s initial sellout*, the visiting institution must return via overnight delivery all remaining tickets. In the case of a sellout, tickets
not to exceed 40 may be returned by the visiting institution to the host institution no later than 1-1/2
hours prior to game time. All other tickets retained by the visiting institution become the financial
responsibility of that institution. The institutions shall coordinate directly on additional visiting team
tickets and processes on a game-by-game basis. (11/16)
*No side-by-side reserved seats available for the public to purchase.
All “killed” tickets for visitor’s rooting section, bands, etc., must be returned no later than 1-1/2 hours
prior to game time. The host institution shall deliver to the visiting institution a preliminary ticket
recap statement showing the tickets used by the visiting institution within 15 business days after the
event. The visiting institution shall be required to confirm the accuracy of this statement within 10 business days of receipt of the statement. (6/63, 5/83, 6/05)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 133

Football Regulations

SPR 6-1-s-(3)

SPR 6-1-t-(3)

(3) Will Call.
No “collect” will call tickets will be accepted from the visiting institution. Will call tickets from the
visiting institution must be presented to the host institution for pickup 1-1/2 hours prior to game time.
At the request of the visiting institution, the host institution shall provide a minimum of one person
to assist with the visiting institution’s will call/player and guest tickets. The visiting institution shall
provide one person to administer its player/guest will call tickets at the event. (5/83, 6/05)
t.

Video Exchange Policies.

All Conference head football coaches have agreed to adopt equitable video exchange policies and to work
to alleviate all exchange problems, and shall not seek to gain an advantage over an opponent through a
“loophole” in the Conference’s video exchange policy. (4/86, 6/89, 6/06)
(1) Off-Season Video Exchange.
All video from the previous season including College Football Playoff Game(s), bowl games, and the
Conference Football Championship Game may be exchanged with a non-Conference opponent. (6/06,
8/15, 7/20)
(2) In-Season Video Exchange.
(a) Each member of the Conference agrees to exchange sideline video and scoreboard/sideline
high definition video (720p) and sideline/end zone intercut high definition video for each contest
(all prior games). Institutions shall not alter the video in any way, including watermarking, color
correcting, cropping, etc. The Conference has adopted an open exchange of video, which means
that all prior games may be secured from the central server by a Conference institution at its discretion once the games have been loaded onto the server. The last video to be exchanged, the most
recently played game video, will be electronically transferred following the game (earliest possible
transfer). All previous games must be uploaded to the central server prior to the institution downloading the final game of its next opponent. (6/93, 10/02, 6/06, 6/11, 8/15, 7/20)
(b) If the preferred method (Catapult Exchange) of electronic transfer of video fails, the institutions shall revert to the following procedures: The high definition video content, in the highest
quality digital format, for all prior games is to be exchanged as soon as possible prior to the scheduled contest using an alternate electronic method of transfer (Box, Dropbox, YouSendIt, etc.) that
the video coordinators agree upon. (6/06, 6/11, 8/15, 7/20)
(c) Conference members will participate in National Open Video Exchange by following all regulations set by the National Open Exchange Co-Op. (6/06, 7/19, 7/20)
(3) Conference Football Championship Game/College Football Playoff Games/Bowl Games.
Conference Football Championship Game, College Football Playoff Games, and bowl games shall be
treated in the same manner as in-season exchange with non-Conference opponents as outlined in SPR
6-2-t-(2)-(c) above. Conference institutions will not send a non-Conference institution a copy of a Conference game unless it is a direct exchange between two institutions meeting in a playoff or bowl game.
Subsequent to completion of the Conference Football Championship Game, the participants will post
their versions of the game in accordance with in-season exchange rules. Institutions that participate in
playoff or bowl games shall post their video no later than January 15. The video from these bowl games
shall be posted to the central server. (4/86, 4/89, 6/89, 6/06, 6/10, 8/15)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 134

Football Regulations

SPR 6-1-t-(4)

SPR 6-2-a-(1)

(4) Video Exchange Rules.
(a) Each host institution shall make available to the visiting institution adequate sideline and end
zone facilities to shoot the game—equal to the host institution’s facilities—without charge to the
visiting institution. (6/89, 2/92, 6/93, 6/06)
(b) Exchange video is to be recorded on the highest quality media format available. The content
must be separated into offense, defense, and kicking game. The intercut video be broken down into
offense, defense and kicking game. Kicking game video shall will be further broken down into the
following phases: kickoff, kickoff return, punt, punt return, PAT/FG, PAT/FG block. (4/86, 6/89,
11/90, 6/93, 6/06, 6/11, 8/15)
(c) A play-by-play document including full, final statistics of each game; flip cards and programs;
and updated statistics shall be made available electronically by each institution’s SID. (6/89, 6/06,
8/15, 7/19)
(d) The exchange format will be 720p. (7/19)
(e) All exchange video shall be in color. (6/89, 6/06)
(f) Preceding each play on sideline video, a full three-second shot of the scoreboard showing as accurate as possible, distance, field position, and game clock must be taken. (6/89, 6/93, 6/06, 8/15)
(g) The recording of all plays should begin when the quarterback approaches the line of scrimmage and shall include all pre-snap shifts and motions. (6/93, 6/06, 8/15)
(h) All institutions shall be notified of any missed play on all exchanged content. Every effort
should be made to correct error(s), a corrected file shall be posted as soon as possible, and all institutions shall be notified. (6/93, 6/06, 8/15)
(i) Every effort should be made by the video coordinators (VCs) to shoot all acts of fighting within
their view. Framing of the shot(s) will be dictated by the act(s) with the VCs using appropriate
judgment. Both teams will be asked to submit all applicable, unedited footage to the Conference
office for review. Fighting and celebrations should not be included on exchange video. (6/93, 6/94,
6/06, 8/15)
(j) Video posted to the central server for the Conference office shall be scoreboard/sideline/end
zone intercut and in continuity game sequence, and posted as soon as possible. (6/89, 8/89, 6/94,
6/00, 6/06, 8/15)
(k) All Pac-12 VC’s agree to deliver, exclusively via Catapult Exchange, all 22 coaches’ video
(O/D/K reels) to the College Football Playoff Committee for all home hosted games and any neutral site games they are deemed the home team. The expectation is that delivery shall occur as soon
as possible following the game or return to campus (7/19, 7/20)
2. Championship Game Policies.
a. Championship Determination.
The Conference champion shall be the winner of the Conference Football Championship Game, played between the two Pac-12 teams with the highest Conference winning percentage. (10/62, 12/76, 5/80, 12/80,
8/85, 12/89, 6/91, 6/08, 10/10, 7/22)
(1) Site.
The Conference Football Championship Game shall be played at Allegiant Stadium in Las Vegas, Nevada. (10/10, 6/11, 8/14, 7/20)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 135
Updated 7/1/22

Football Regulations

SPR 6-2-a-2

SPR 6-2-b-(1)

(2) Determination of Home Team.
The home team in the Pac-12 Championship Game will be the team with the highest conference winning percentage. In the event of a tie, refer to the Pac-12 Football Championship Tiebreaker procedure
[SPR 6-2-b-(1) and (2)]. (8/14, 11/16, 7/22)
(3) Reschedulng Policies for Football Championship Game.
In the event an act of God or other occurrence beyond the control of the Conference adversely impacts
the scheduled start time or date of the Conference Football Championship Game, the Commissioner,
after consultation with appropriate authorities, business partners, and university officials, will determine the appropriate steps necessary to play, delay or postpone the game. Should the Commissioner
determine that postponement is warranted, the game will be rescheduled to be played as soon as possible and preferably within the same weekend. In the event that the Allegiant Stadium is deemed to
be unusable or unsafe or other forces make the playing of the game at Allegiant Stadium impractical,
consideration will be given to moving to a game site in proximity to Allegiant Stadium to be played at
the previously scheduled time/date or as soon as reasonably possible thereafter. The Commissioner,
in consultation with the Chair of the Pac-12 Board of Directors, has ultimate authority to determine the
time/date and site of the Championship Game under these circumstances. (10/11, 8/14, 7/20)
[Additional Championship Game policies may be found in the Conference Championship Game Handbook.]
b. Tiebreaker.
(1) Two-Team Tie.
(a) If two teams are tied for first place both teams will participate in the championship game and
the winner of the head-to-head will be the #1 seed. If there is not a tie for first place, but two teams
are tied for second place, the two-team tiebreaker policy will apply and the winner will be the #2
seed and visiting team. (7/22)
(b) Win percentage against the next highest placed common opponent in the standings (based on
record in all games played within the Conference), proceeding through the standings. a. When
arriving at another group of tied teams while comparing records, use each team’s win percentage
against the collective tied teams as a group (prior to that group’s own tie-breaking procedure)
rather than the performance against individual tied teams. (8/14, 7/22)
(c) Win percentage against all common conference opponents. (7/22)
(d) Combined win percentage in conference games of conference opponents (i.e., strength of conference schedule). (7/22)
(e) Total number of wins in a 12-game season. The following conditions will apply to the calculation of the total number of wins:
(i) Only one win against a team from the NCAA Football Championship Subdivision or
lower division will be counted annually. (7/22)
Any games that are exempted from counting against the annual maximum number of football contests per NCAA rules (NCAA 17.10.5.2.1) shall not be included. (8/14, 7/22)
(f) Highest ranking by SportSource Analytics (team Rating Score metric) following the last weekend of regular-season games. (8/14, 7/22)
(g) Coin Toss. (7/22)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 136
Updated 7/1/22

Football Regulations

SPR 6-2-b-(2)

SPR 6-3

(2) Multiple Team Tie.
In the event of a tie between more than two teams, the following procedures will be used. After one
team has an advantage and is “seeded,” all remaining teams in the multiple-team tie-breaker will repeat the multiple-team tie-breaking procedure. If at any point the multiple-team tie is reduced to two
teams, the two-team tie-breaking procedure will be applied. (6/11, 8/14, 11/16, 7/22)
(a) Head-to-head (best cumulative win percentage in games among the tied teams). If not every
tied team has played each other, go to step b. (8/14, 7/22)
(b) Win percentage against all common conference opponents (must be common among all teams
involved in the tie). (8/14, 7/22)
(c) Record against the next highest placed common opponent in the standings (based on record in
all games played within the conference), proceeding through the standings. (8/14, 7/22)
(i) When arriving at another group of tied teams while comparing records, use each
team’s win percentage against the collective tied teams as a group (prior to that group’s
own tie-breaking procedure) rather than the performance against individual tied teams.
(7/22)
(d) Combined win percentage in conference games of conference opponents (i.e., strength of conference schedule). (8/14, 7/22)
(e) Highest ranking by SportSource Analytics (team Rating Score metric) following the last weekend of regular-season games. (8/14, 11/16, 7/22)
(f) Coin toss (8/14, 11/16, 7/22)
3. Postseason Bowl Games.
Conference football teams shall be selected to participate in postseason bowl games in the following sequential
order:
(1) The Conference champion (per SPR 6-1-a) shall represent the Conference in the Rose Bowl in those
years in which the Conference champion is not rated No. 1, 2, 3 or 4 in the College Football Playoff
(CFP) final regular season rankings. In addition, as presented in SPR 6-1-e-(3), if every team does not
play nine Conference games, the winning percentage in all regular-season Conference games played
also shall be used to determine the subsequent positions in the standings of the other teams to determine bowl positions. (6/98, 6/06, 6/08, 3/12, 8/14)
(2) At its option, the CFP may select another team to participate in one of its games. (12/94, 6/08,
8/14)
(3) After the Rose Bowl and/or CFP participants from the Conference have been identified, the Conference has bowl agreements with six additional bowl games which have selection preference in the following order: Alamo Bowl, Holiday Bowl, Sun Bowl, LA Bowl, San Francisco Bowl, ESPN Pool Bowls
(2021-22): Gasparilla Bowl, First Responders Bowl, Armed Forces Bowl, Independence Bowl. Team
selection criteria for each bowl game is outlined in the agreement between the Pac-12 and the bowl.
(12/94, 12/95, 5/97, 9/98, 6/06, 6/10, 11/10, 6/11, 3/12, 8/14, 8/21)
(4) A Conference football team must have six regular-season wins, including a limit of one against an
NCAA Football Championship Subdivision (FCS) team, in order to participate in a post-season bowl
game. [A team that plays 13 regular-season games (e.g., game at Hawaii) and has a 6-7 record would be
bowl eligible.] (6/18)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 137
Updated 7/1/22

SPR 6-4
4.

Football Regulations

SPR 6-5-a

Practice Policies.

Proper football technique and mechanics, especially when blocking and tackling are involved, should be the
priority at every football practice. The core, upper body and lower body should be utilized for contact and
players should be taught to avoid using the helmet to initiate contact. Players initiating contact should neither
utilize their helmet in play-making, nor target the recipient of a block or tackle above the shoulders.
a. NCAA Rules.
Except where expressly limited below, Pac-12 institutions shall continue to abide by the football practice
rules and regulations outlined in the annual NCAA Division I Manual.
b. Definition of “Full Contact”.
The Pac-12 shall define “full contact” as any live tackling, live tackling drills, scrimmages or other activities
where players are generally taken to the ground. Full contact shall not include “thud” sessions or drills that
involve “wrapping up” where players are not taken to the ground and contact is not aggressive in nature.
c. Fall/In-Season Practices.
Pac-12 institutions shall limit full contact practices to two (2) per week during the regular football season
[the period between the first regular-season game and the last regular-season game or Pac-12 Championship Game (for participating institutions)].
d. Preseason Practices.
For days during which Pac-12 institutions schedule a two-a-day practice, full contact shall be allowed in
one practice (the other practice is limited to helmets and shoulder pads). If full contact practices are scheduled consecutively around one of the two-a-day full contact practices, only one of those practices shall be
more than 50 percent full contact. (e.g., if a morning session of a two-a- day practice is full contact, that
morning session practice or the preceding one-a-day practice would be limited to no more than 50 percent
full contact.
e. Spring Practices.
Pac-12 institutions shall schedule spring practices so that of the eight (8) permissible full contact practices,
only two (2) of those full contact practices occur in a given week. (NCAA rules define these eight practices
as practices involving “tackling.”) This rule will be subject to instances where inclement weather or other
unforeseen circumstances have constricted or otherwise altered a previously finalized spring schedule that
complied with this rule.
5. Awards.
The Conference football coaches shall select recipients for all Conference awards. Coaches shall submit nominations from their team for all-conference consideration Monday prior to the conclusion of the regular season.
The list of nominations and ballot will be provided to the coaches after the conclusion of the regular season. The
voting procedure for all awards shall be based on a weighted ranking. Coaches may not vote for themselves or
for their own players for any of the awards. All Conference voting shall take place the Monday after the Pac-12
Football Championship Game (by Noon Pacific Time). (6/92, 8/14, 6/17, 12/17)
a. All-Conference Team.
The all-Conference first and second teams shall consist of 11 offensive players, 11 defensive players, a
punter, a kicker, a return specialist, and a special teams player. First-team honorees shall be provided an
award from the Conference. Second-team honorees shall be provided a certificate by the Conference office.
Players who are not selected all-conference, but received at least two votes, shall be accorded honorable
2022-23 Handbook • Page 138

Football Regulations

SPR 6-5-a

SPR 6-8

mention. After the selection process, the Conference office shall provide the all-conference team to the
coaches. Coaches may then add up to two individuals from his team for honorable mention and inclusion
in a Conference media release. (6/92, 2/99, 6/99, 8/14)
b. Individual Awards.
Individual awards from the Conference office shall be provided to the Coach of the Year, the Offensive
Player of the Year, the Pat Tillman Defensive Player of the Year, and the Freshman/Newcomer of the Year
(offensive and defensive) in the Conference. Balloting conducted for individual awards shall use a weighted voting method. (6/92, 2/99, 6/04, 6/11)
6. Coaches’ Meetings.
There shall be two meetings of the Conference football coaches, one in-person and one via telephone conference
call, with the time and site to be established by the Conference office. Attendance by the head coach is mandatory. (12/85, 6/92, 6/95)
7. Additional Football Policies.
Conference football coaching staffs shall abide by the following rules which may be more stringent than those
contained in the NCAA Manual.
a. Camps and Clinics.
An institution’s camp or clinic shall be confined to its own campus. Coaches may participate on an individual basis in off-campus football camps or clinics involving prospective student-athletes. (5/88, 12/92,
6/95, 5/97, 8/14)
b. Policies for Professional Football Scouts.
(1) Senior Evaluations/Workouts.
If it is requested that a student-athlete from a different Pac-12 institution be permitted to participate in
another Pac-12 institution’s pro day, permission must be provided by that student-athlete’s head coach
to participate in the event. (12/90, 12/91, 6/93, 6/94, 6/03, 8/14)
(2) Contests.
It shall be institutional policy whether scouts for professional football teams may be provided complimentary admission to games and access to press box facilities. Scouts and player personnel employees
for professional football teams shall not be allowed on the sidelines during the conduct of all football
games hosted by Conference members. (12/90, 12/95, 2/98, 6/99, 10/07, 11/07)
8. Spring Football Scheduling Policies.
Dates and venues for spring football games must be submitted no later than November 15 (allows Pac-12 Networks spring television schedules for all sports to be finalized by mid-December). (8/16)
In the event two traditional rival institutions desire the same date and overlapping time for their spring games,
the two institutions will be required to adjust their start times to accommodate clean two-hour telecast windows for both games. (8/16)
Subsequent to November 15 and only in the event of extenuating circumstances, an institution that wishes to
move its spring football date or time must notify the Pac-12 Conference/Networks to find a replacement date
and/or time. (8/16)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 139

SPR 7-1

Men’s Golf Regulations

SPR 7-2-b

CHAPTER 7—MEN’S GOLF REGULATIONS
1. Playing Season Policies.
a. Championships Determination.
The team and individual Conference champions in men’s golf shall be determined at a Conference championship tournament. (6/92, 6/01, 8/16)
(1) Championship Ties.
In the event of a tie for the team championship, NCAA team tie breaking procedures shall be followed
to determine the champion. If circumstances (e.g. weather) dictate that a playoff cannot be conducted,
the tied teams shall be declared co-champions and the Conference automatic qualifier to the NCAA
Championships shall be determined by a vote of the Senior Woman Administrators Committee. (5/81,
6/01, 6/06)
In the event of a tie for the individual championship, a sudden death playoff shall be held immediately
after the conclusion of the final round to determine the champion. If circumstances (e.g., weather) dictate that a playoff cannot be conducted, the tied individuals shall be declared co-champions. If the tie is
between members of the same team, the playoff shall be held at the discretion of the team’s coach, who
shall be allowed to determine whether a playoff shall be held. If a playoff is not held, the individuals
shall be declared co-champions. (5/81, 6/06, 6/07)
b. NCAA Automatic Qualifier.
The Conference team champion shall receive the Automatic Qualifying bid to represent the Conference in
the NCAA Division I Men’s Golf Championships. (8/21)
c. Conference Schedule.
Each Conference team shall make its best effort to participate in an event hosted by a Conference team.
(6/92, 6/01, 8/13)
(1) Rescheduling Policies.
A round of play not completed within a tournament’s scheduled time frame shall be cancelled. (7/92)
2. Conference Championships.
a. Competition site.
No golf course with gender-related discriminatory tee time restrictions may be used. (6/93, 6/95)
b. Date and Site Rotation.
The Conference Championships shall be held during the last week in April with the exact dates to be determined by golf course availability. The championship site shall be selected on the following rotation basis:
(6/00)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 140

Men’s Golf Regulations

SPR 7-2-b
Year
2022-23
2023-24
2024-25
2025-26
2026-27
2027-28
2028-29

Host Institution
Stanford
Arizona State
Oregon State
UCLA
Arizona
Washington State
Utah

SPR 7-2-g

Year
Host Institution
2029-30
Colorado
2030-31
USC
2031-32
Oregon
2032-33
California
2033-34
Washington
(6/87, 12/87, 10/10, 8/14, 6/18, 7/20)

c. Entertainment.
The host institution will be expected to provide snacks and refreshments on the course, one meal per day,
and will have the option of hosting a banquet (at the discretion of the institution) (6/88, 6/07, 6/08, 10/09,
8/15, 8/21)
d. Entries.
Teams participating in the Conference Championships shall consist of a maximum of six players. If a twosome format is used, each of the top six seeded teams, based upon the Golf Coaches Association District 8
rankings, shall be assigned via a blind draw to one of six groups for the first round of the Conference Championships. The Conference office shall conduct the draw and inform all coaches of the outcome two weeks
before the start of competition. In addition, the Conference office shall conduct a second draw to determine
the order of play for the groups during the first day of competition. Following each day of competition,
the pairings for the next day shall be determined by team scores. Order of play in a twosome format after
the first day shall be teams 5-6, 3-4, and 1-2 off the first tee in that order, and teams 7-8, 9-10, and 11-12 off
the 10th tee in that order. If a threesome format is used, the defending Conference team champion shall
be assigned the first tee time on the first tee on the first day of play and the other eleven teams shall be assigned starting hole, order of play and partners via a blind draw by the Conference office. Following each
day of competition, the pairings for the next day shall be determined by team scores. Following each day
of competition, the pairings for the next day shall be determined by team scores. Order of play in a threesome format after the first day shall be teams 4-5-6 and 1-2-3 off the first tee in that order and teams 7-8-9
and 10-11-12 off the 10th tee. A combination of twosome and threesome formats is permissible. (5/83, 6/87,
6/88, 6/96, 6/03, 6/07, 6/08, 6/11)
e. Format.
Seventy-two holes of stroke play golf over three days of competition shall decide the Conference Golf
Championships. The host institution shall determine which day the 36-hole competition will be held and
shall notify all other institutions at least 30 days in advance of the Championships. It is recommended that
the coaches decide whether twosomes or threesomes are used in the Championships at the annual meeting
the year prior to the Championships. (8/80, 6/87, 6/89, 6/90, 6/96, 6/06)
f.

Host Responsibilities.

The host institution, at least one month in advance of the Championships, shall notify the other member
institutions of the time schedule of the event, giving details of the tournament and such related items as
housing, coaches meetings, publicity needs, and the deadline for entries. (7/10)
g. Lineups and Substitutions
The head coach must submit his or her lineup according to playing position. The six contestants from each
institution must be determined by the conclusion of the coaches administrative meeting prior to the tournament. The Conference will follow the NCAA policy for substitutions. (6/05, 7/19)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 141

SPR 7-2-h

Men’s Golf Regulations

SPR 7-2-k

h. Maximum Effort.
Per AR 4-4, Conference members are expected to compete in Conference championships in sports they
sponsor, and coaches are expected to attempt to field their strongest team to compete in single site Conference championships. (7/22)
i.

Playing Rules.

USGA rules shall govern play at the Conference Championships except as modified below. NCAA Championships rules shall be used for rules pertaining to equipment, uniforms, pace of play, spectators, and
tobacco use. (6/92, 6/96)
(1) Open Advice.
The NCAA advice rule shall be used. (6/87, 6/89, 6/02, 10/02)
(2) Range Finders.
Rules pertaining to the use of range finders at the NCAA Championships shall be applied to the Conference Championships. (6/06)
(3) Scoring.
The five players with the low scores on a team for any 18-hole round shall constitute the scoring members of the team for that round, and the team with the lowest total combined score for all rounds shall
be the team champion. (5/83)
(4) Unbecoming Conduct.
The Games Committee, which shall consist of two neutral observers (no coaches), shall be authorized
to assess a penalty or to disqualify an individual for that round if the player is found to have engaged
in actions detrimental to the sport of golf or unbecoming to a college golfer (club throwing, abusive
language, property damage, etc.). No penalty shall be assessed until the Games Committee has interviewed the player(s) involved and there shall be no discussion among the members of the Games Committee concerning the incident prior to the interview(s). (5/83, 8/84)
j.

Hole Location Sheets.

Hole location sheets for all rounds shall be provided to all participants. (8/84, 8/16)
k. Practice Round.
The host institution shall make every effort to provide each team with one practice round on the day preceding the Championships. The tee time order for the practice round shall be selected via a blind draw by
the Conference office at the same time that the draw for team pairings and order of play is conducted, with
the exception that institutions local to the site of the championships shall be assigned the latest tee times
for the practice round. The NCAA Championships one-ball practice round policy shall be in effect with
the exception that multiple balls may be used in chipping and putting. Teams, coaches and individuals are
prohibited from being at the site of the Conference Championships from September 1 prior to the Championships until the practice round the day prior to the Championships, with the following exceptions: (6/65,
12/77, 5/83, 6/93, 6/96, 6/00, 6/01, 6/09, 6/18)
(1) The Conference Championships host team, (6/09)
(2) A team designating that course as an institutional practice facility, (6/09)
(3) A team competing in a regularly scheduled event at that site, (6/09)
2022-23 Handbook • Page 142
Updated 7/1/22

SPR 7-2-k

Men’s Golf Regulations

SPR 7-3-b

(4) Coaches of combined men’s and women’s programs who are coaching the women’s team at a competition, (6/09)
(5) A certified competition is held at that site. (6/18)
l.

Rescheduling Policies.

In the event that weather, darkness, or other conditions result in suspension of play by the Committee, the
following procedures shall be followed: (6/18)
1) Play shall be resumed when possible and every effort will be made to complete 72 holes. If it is not
possible to complete a stipulated round in the dates allotted, scores shall revert to the last complete
round. (6/18)
2) If 36 holes of play have been completed, the results shall be final and the low scoring team shall be
declared the team champion. (6/18)
m. Results.
The sports information director of the host institution shall provide the Conference office with full results
of the Championships.
3. Awards.
The Conference men’s golf coaches shall select recipients for all men’s golf awards. Coaches may not vote for
themselves or for their own players for any of the awards. (6/92, 6/94, 6/10, 8/14, 8/15, 6/17)
a. All-Conference Team.
Within 36 hours of the conclusion of the Conference Championships, the Conference office shall provide
coaches with a head-to-head report and a player comparison report generated by Golfstat of those players
with a Golfstat or Golf Week ranking of 1 to 250. Within 72 hours of the conclusion of the Championships,
coaches shall discuss nominations via conference call. Following the conference call, each coach shall provide the Conference office with a list of his or her all-Conference selections in rank order. Nominees with
the highest number of votes will determine the first and second teams. Nominees who were not selected to
the first or second team, but received votes from two or more coaches, will be named honorable mention.
The all-Conference team shall consist of an eight-player first team, an eight-player second team, and honorable mention. Members of the first team shall be provided an award from the Conference. Members of the
second team shall be provided a certificate by the Conference office. Honorable mention selections shall be
recognized in a Conference media release. The individual Conference champion shall automatically be a
member of the first team, and the second- through tenth-place finishers at the Conference Championships
shall automatically be among the all-Conference honorees. (6/92, 6/99, 6/03, 6/07, 8/14, 8/15, 6/17)
b. All-Freshman Team.
The all-freshman team shall consist of five players and shall be provided a certificate from the Conference.
Coaches will provide nominees from their own team prior to the Championships. Within 36 hours of the
conclusion of the Conference Championships, the Conference office shall provide coaches with a head-tohead report and a player comparison report generated by Golfstat. Within 72 hours of the conclusion of the
Championships, coaches shall discuss nominations via conference call. Following the conference call, each
coach shall provide the Conference office with a list of his or her all-Conference selections in rank order.
(6/12, 6/17)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 143

SPR 7-3-c

Men’s Golf Regulations

SPR 7-4

c. Individual Awards.
An individual award from the Conference office shall be provided to the Coach of the Year, the Golfer of the
Year, the Freshman of the Year, and the top six individual finishers at the Conference Men’s Golf Championships. Balloting conducted for individual awards shall use a weighted voting method. (6/92, 2/99, 6/00,
10/02, 6/09, 6/11)
4. Meetings of Coaches.
There shall be an annual meeting of the men’s golf coaches. The attendance of each head coach is mandatory.
(6/92, 6/07, 10/11, 8/16)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 144

Women’s Golf Regulations

SPR 8-1

SPR 8-2-b

CHAPTER 8—WOMEN’S GOLF REGULATIONS
1. Playing Season Policies.
a. Championships Determination.
The team and individual Conference champions in women’s golf shall be determined at a Conference
championship tournament. (6/92, 6/01, 6/10, 8/21)
(1) Championship Ties.
In the event of a tie for the team championship, NCAA team tiebreaking procedures shall be followed
to determine the champion. In the event of a tie for the individual championship, a sudden death playoff shall determine the champion. (6/87, 6/92, 6/01)
b. NCAA Automatic Qualifier.
The Conference team champion shall receive the Automatic Qualifying bid to represent the Conference in
the NCAA Division I Women’s Golf Championships. If the Pac-12 Women’s Golf Championships cannot be
conducted, or if fewer than 36 holes are completed at the Championship, the NCAA Automatic Qualifier
will be determined by the program that is ranked highest based on an average of the Golfweek Sagarin ratings and Golfstat National Women’s Golf rankings head-to-head standings of NCAA Division I women’s
teams. (8/21)
c. Conference Schedule.
Each team shall meet every other Conference opponent annually. (6/92, 6/01)
(1) Rescheduling Policies.
A round of play not completed within a tournament’s scheduled time frame shall be cancelled. (7/92)
2. Conference Championships.
a. Competition site.
The competition site must be one which will provide an adequate block of tee times, preferably in the
morning, with free or reduced greens fees and does not require the use of caddies or carts. The course shall
be well-marked and staked and the site shall include a scoreboard, driving range, and food service. No golf
course with a tee time restriction may be used. (6/92, 6/93, 6/96)
b. Date and Site Rotation.
The Conference Championships shall conclude no later than the Sunday prior to the NCAA regional selections. The championship course shall be selected on the following rotation basis: (6/87, 12/87, 4/88, 6/00,
6/04)
Year
2022-23
2023-24
2024-25
2025-26
2026-27
2027-28

Host Institution
Arizona State
Washington State
UCLA
Oregon State
Colorado
California

Year
Host Institution
2028-29
Arizona
2029-30
Washington
2030-31
USC
2031-32
Stanford
2032-33
Oregon
(6/95, 6/00, 6/07, 10/10, 8/14, 7/20)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 145

SPR 8-2-c

Women’s Golf Regulations

SPR 8-2-i

c. Entertainment.
The host institution shall be limited to providing a maximum of one meal per day, one event (banquet or
other hosted night out), and refreshments on the course. (6/88, 6/07, 6/08, 6/09)
d. Entries.
Entries are limited to golfers from Conference member institutions. It is recommended that split tees be
used throughout the Championship with the host institution having the option to use single tee if so dictated by site conditions. Play shall be conducted with four twosomes and one threesome. Team pairings for
the first day of the Championships shall be determined by a blind draw, with the number one seed guaranteed to play in a twosome off the first tee with a tee time in the middle of the draw. All team seedings
shall be based on an average of the Golfweek Sagarin ratings and Golfstat national women’s golf rankings
head-to-head standings of NCAA Division I women’s teams. A minimum of three days prior to the start of
the Championships and using the latest rankings available, the Conference office shall calculate the average of the Golfweek Sagarin ratings and Golfstat national women’s golf rankings head-to-head standings
of NCAA Division I women’s teams to determine the seeding. (4/88, 6/92, 6/94, 6/96, 5/97, 2/99, 6/00,
6/04, 6/05, 6/07, 10/10, 6/11, 6/12)
Lineups shall be provided to the host institution by 5:00 local time the day prior to the coaches’ meeting at
the Championships. Lineup changes are permitted up to the time when lineups are approved at the conclusion of the coaches’ meeting. Any lineup changes requested after the coaches’ meeting shall be submitted
to the Rules Committee for approval; changes are permitted only until each team’s fifth participant tees off.
(6/12, 8/14)
The Championships entries format may be reviewed, and if necessary, adjusted annually to assure golf
course accommodation. (2/99)
(1) Fine.
A monetary fine shall be imposed for non-compliance with the deadline for submission of provision of
lineup. (6/17)
e. Format.
The Conference Championships shall be decided by a three-day, 54-hole tournament. (4/88)
f.

Host Responsibilities.

The host institution, at least 28 days in advance of the Championships, shall notify the other member institutions of the time schedule and details of the Championships, and such related items as housing, coaches
meetings, publicity needs, and the deadline for entries. At the coaches’ meeting prior to the start of the
Championships, the tournament director shall present a contingency plan should any golfer assigned to a
twosome is unable to participate or complete a round. (6/08, 10/10, 8/14)
h. Maximum Effort.
Per AR 4-4, Conference members are expected to compete in Conference championships in sports they
sponsor, and coaches are expected to attempt to field their strongest team to compete in single site Conference championships. (7/22)
i.

Officials.

A minimum of six rules officials shall be assigned to the Championships. (6/00)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 146
Updated 7/1/22

Women’s Golf Regulations

SPR 8-2-j
j.

SPR 8-2-k

Playing Rules.

USGA rules shall govern play at the Conference Championships except as modified below. NCAA Championship rules shall be used for rules pertaining to equipment, uniforms, pace of play, and spectators. Each
competitor should carry a current copy of the USGA rule book. (6/96, 5/97)
(1) Cars, Carts, and Caddies.
Participants may not use cars or carts to carry their clubs. An exception to this policy may be granted
by a majority vote of the coaches if the individual is permanently disabled. A written request must be
submitted to the Conference office with accompanying medical statements requesting the use of a car
at least one week in advance of the Championships. Pull carts may be used provided an institution
informs the host institution of its pull cart needs prior to the Championships on the institution’s lineup
form. (6/96, 6/98, 6/99)
(2) Rain.
All effort shall be made to have a minimum of 54 holes played. In the event of rain, play shall continue
unless the course is deemed unplayable by the management. The final decision shall lie with the Rules
Committee. If rain forces cancellation of play, the following procedures shall be followed:
(a) If at any time after 36 holes of play the tournament is called because of rain, the scores shall be
final.
(b) If 50 percent or more of the participants complete a round (a round being 18 holes) prior to
inclement weather which forces play to stop, the round shall be continued either that day or the
following day, weather permitting. If less than 50 percent of the participants complete the round,
the round shall be terminated and the scores reverted to the last complete round. (6/87)
(3) Rules Committee.
A Rules Committee, created by the Tournament Director, shall consist of a minimum of three qualified
(USGA certified, if available) persons. Any larger committee must be composed of an odd number of
members. No coach from any participating institution shall be a member of the Committee.
(4) Scoring.
Competition shall be by stroke play. A team travel party shall consist of a maximum of six players. Five
golfers shall compete in which four of the five golfers may score for the team. (6/96, 6/98, 6/04, 7/22)
(5) Unbecoming Conduct.
The Rules Committee shall be authorized to assess a two-stroke penalty or to disqualify an individual
for that round if the player is found to have engaged in actions detrimental to the sport of golf or unbecoming a college golfer (e.g., club throwing, abusive language, property damage, etc.).
k. Practice Round.
The host institution shall make every effort to provide each team with one practice round on the day preceding the Championships. The tee time order for the practice round shall be determined based on team
seeding. The order for the practice round shall correspond with the tee times set for the first day of competition. The practice round shall be played by fivesomes with the tee-off times at 15-minute intervals. Teams
other than the host team shall not be permitted to play or walk the golf course on the eight days preceding
the practice round. No team other than the host shall be allowed access to the golf course or practice areas
at the Conference Championships site on the day prior to the practice round. (4/88, 6/90, 6/94, 6/96, 6/02,
6/04, 6/06, 6/09, 6/17)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 147
Updated 7/1/22

SPR 8-2-l
l.

Women’s Golf Regulations

SPR 8-4

Results.

The sports information director of the host institution shall provide the Conference office with full results
of the Championships.
3. Awards.
The Conference women’s golf coaches shall provide information or select recipients for all women’s golf
awards. (6/92, 6/09)
a. All-Conference Team.
The All-Conference team shall consist of a 12-player first team and a minimum of six and maximum of
eight honorable mention selections. For all-Conference consideration, a golfer must compete in at least four
events and the Conference Championship; all exceptions require a coaches vote. Members of the first team
shall be provided an award from the Conference. Honorable mention selections shall be recognized in a
Conference media release. The individual Conference champion shall automatically be a member of the
first team, and will become the thirteenth member if not already selected. (8/16)
After regular-season competition has been completed, the Conference office shall provide the rankings
of the top 32 players according to Golfstat to the coaches. Each coach shall provide a list of his or her allConference selections in rank order and may not vote for their own players. The Conference office shall
provide the results of the ranking-order voting, and coaches may request player-comparison discussions.
The final vote will occur at the coaches’ meeting. (6/92, 6/93, 6/95, 2/99, 6/99, 6/00, 6/01, 6/03, 6/04,
6/05, 6/07, 8/13, 8/14)
b. Individual Awards.
An individual award from the Conference office shall be provided to the top six individual finishers at the
Conference Women’s Golf Championships, the Coach of the Year, the Golfer of the Year, and the Freshman
of the Year in women’s golf. Nominees for Golfer of the Year and Freshman of the Year shall be submitted to
the Conference office one week prior to the Conference championships. Balloting conducted for individual
awards shall use a weighted voting method. Using a ballot provided by the Conference office, coaches shall
assign three points to their first choice and one point to their second choice for coach of the year. The coach
achieving the highest point total shall be named Conference Coach of the Year. Coaches may not vote for
themselves for the award. Balloting shall be conducted by the Conference office and completed after the
NCAA Championships. (4/88, 6/92, 2/99, 6/02, 6/05, 6/09, 6/11)
4. Meetings of Coaches.
There shall be an annual meeting of the women’s golf coaches. The attendance of each head coach is mandatory.
The head rules official for the Conference Championships shall be requested to attend the tournament meeting.
(6/92, 10/11, 8/16)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 148

Women’s Gymnastic Regulations

SPR 9-1

SPR 9-2-b-(1)-(a)

CHAPTER 9—WOMEN’S GYMNASTIC REGULATIONS
1. Playing Season Policies.
a. Championship Determination.
(1) Regular-Season Conference Competition.
The team with the highest won-loss percentage during regular-season Conference competition
shall be declared the Conference champion. If that percentage is shared by more than one team, a
co-champion shall exist. (6/92, 6/18, 7/20)
(2) Conference Championship.
There will be a Conference championship event at the conclusion of the Conference regular season.
The team and individual Conference champions in women’s gymnastics shall be determined at the
championship meet. (6/92, 7/20)
b. Competition.
Competition shall begin no earlier than January 1 and conclude April 30 or with the NCAA Women’s Gymnastics Championship. (6/87, 6/92, 6/94)
c. Conference Schedule.
Each team shall schedule one meet against each Conference team annually, starting in 2020. Institutions
may mutually agree to change the date of a scheduled Conference meet or compete at a non-dual meet.
(5/89, 6/92, 6/94, 6/95, 6/07, 10/08, 10/10, 6/18)
(1) Rescheduling Policies.
If a meet does not begin before 9:00 p.m. on the date for which it is scheduled, it shall be rescheduled
only upon the mutual agreement of the administrators of the competing institutions. (7/92)
2. Meet Policies.
a. Officiating Policies.
See AR 6-15.
b. Playing Rules.
All meets shall use the rules adopted for NCAA Division I team competition and annual NCAA rule modifications except as outlined below. (4/88, 6/92, 6/93, 6/17)
(1) Equipment.
Equipment and matting requirements for competition are set forth in the USA Gymnastics Women’s
Program Rules and Policies. Conference institutions shall follow the Level 10 equipment specifications,
in addition to the following Conference specifications. (6/94, 8/21)
(a) Balance Beam.
Except for a small mark on the top surface of the beam, chalk may not be applied directly to the
beam. A small amount of chalk may be applied to the gymnast’s hands and feet as needed for
safety. (6/94, 12/19)
2022-23 Handbook • Page 149

SPR 9-2-b-(1)-(b)

Women’s Gymnastic Regulations

SPR 9-3-b

(b) Floor Exercise.
It is strongly suggested that floor speakers and a component system that meets NCAA specifications be used in the floor exercise area during regular-season meets. (5/90, 6/93, 6/94, 6/06)
(2) Format.
The visiting institution shall be notified in writing of the Conference-meet format. Changes in format
after January 1 shall not be permitted unless mutually agreeable to the participating institutions. Conference teams shall be given preference in competitive order at non-dual meets. If there are three or
more Conference teams competing, the visiting team scheduled for the dual meet by the Conference
schedule shall be given preference in the competitive order. (6/87, 6/99, 10/12)
(3) Lineups.
Visiting institutions must provide a lineup to the meet director at least one hour prior to the start of
competition. Changes in the lineup shall be made prior to the beginning of each event as long as the
order remains in compliance with NCAA rules.
(4) Number of Competitors.
No more than six gymnasts per event per institution shall be allowed. (6/87, 6/92, 6/93)
(5) Scoring.
(a) All meets shall use open scoring. Start values also must be flashed. (4/88, 6/92, 6/94, 6/05)
(b) The host institution must select knowledgeable scorekeepers to assure accuracy.
c. Public Address Announcer.
A public address announcer shall be required for all Conference events.
d. Results.
The meet director shall provide complete official results within 20 minutes of the conclusion of the meet.
3. Conference Championships.
a. Entry Form.
An entry form, which includes participants and non-participants, must be submitted to the meet director
and Conference office at least one week prior to the event. (6/02)
(1) Fine.
A monetary fine shall be imposed for non-compliance with the deadline for entry form submission.
(6/17)
b. Equipment.
Equipment and matting requirements for the Conference Championship are set forth in the USA Gymnastics Women’s Program Rules and Policies. The Level 10 equipment specifications shall be used during the
Conference Championship, in addition to the following specifications. (5/90, 6/93, 6/94, 6/06)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 150

SPR 9-3-b-(1)

Women’s Gymnastic Regulations

SPR 9-3-h

(1) Floor Exercise.
It is strongly suggested that floor speakers and a component system that meets NCAA specifications be used in the floor exercise area during regular-season meets. (5/90, 6/93, 6/02, 6/04, 6/05,
6/06)
c. Expense Sharing
Event management expenses, championship momentos, and travel expenses (airfare and ground transportation) for each team shall be shared equally by the competing institutions. (7/19)
d. Maximum Effort.
Per AR 4-4, Conference members are expected to compete in Conference championships in sports they
sponsor, and coaches are expected to attempt to field their strongest team to compete in single site Conference championships. (7/22)
e. Officiating Policies.
A judges’ meeting shall be held prior to the onset of competition, not to conflict with the coaches’ meeting.
The meet director shall attend all judges’ meetings. See also AR 6 and AR 6-15. (6/92)
f.

Playing Rules.

The Conference Championships shall use the rules adopted for NCAA Division I regular season and annual NCAA rule modifications except as outlined below. (6/92, 6/93, 6/016/17)
(1) Format.
The meet format shall be two, four-team sessions conducted on the same day. Teams shall be seeded
based on the regional qualification scores available the Monday before the championships. Seed Nos.
1-4 shall compete in the evening session, and Seed Nos. 5-8 in the first session. The Conference office
shall determine the starting times for the two sessions. The rotational order shall be established the
same day the seeds are finalized. The top three seeds in each session (in order of ranking) shall select
from the available events, the event on which it wishes to begin, following the Olympic order thereafter. (6/92, 6/93, 6/99, 6/01, 6/11, 10/12, 8/14, 8/16, 6/17, 7/19)
(2) Interference with Meet.
Any interference with the meet shall be handled by the Jury of Appeals. A 0.3 point deduction from a
team’s score may be assessed.
(3) Jury of Appeals.
The Jury of Appeals for the Championships shall consist of the Conference staff liaison, the meet director, the meet referee, the chief event judge, and the next-highest rated judge at the event who is not
involved in the event in question. (4/88, 5/89, 6/02, 6/08)
g. Practice Sessions.
The practice sessions shall follow the NCAA regional format. There shall be two practice sessions, each being one hour and 40 minutes in length (20 minutes for stretching and 20 minutes per event).
h. Qualifying Standards.
There shall be no qualifying standards for the Conference Women’s Gymnastics Championships. (6/92)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 151
Updated 7/1/22

SPR 9-3-i
i.

Women’s Gymnastic Regulations

SPR 9-5

Squad Limit.

There shall be a squad limit of 18 for the Conference Championships. (11/86, 6/94, 6/00, 6/09, 6/10, 6/17)
4. Awards.
The Conference women’s gymnastics coaches shall select recipients for all women’s gymnastics individual
awards. Nominees for individual awards shall be submitted to the Conference office two weeks prior to the
Conference Championships. Balloting shall be completed by the beginning of the timed warm-ups the day of
the Championship. Balloting conducted for individual awards shall use a weighted voting method. Each coach
shall be allowed two votes in the balloting for the Gymnast of the Year and Freshman/Newcomer of the Year.
(6/87, 5/91, 6/92, 6/02, 6/05, 6/06, 6/11, 12/13)
a. All-Conference Team.
The All-Conference teams shall be determined by qualifying scores, including the regular season, and the
Pac-12 Championships. (5/89, 5/91, 6/06, 6/07, 6/08, 8/14, 8/16)
The first team shall consist of the top six all-around finishers (first place through sixth place, including ties),
and the top six finishers in each individual event (first place through sixth place, including ties). (8/16,
12/19)
The honorable mention shall consist of seventh and eighth place top finishers in each individual event including all-around (including ties). (12/19)
b. Individual Awards.
Individual awards from the Conference office shall be provided to the Coach of the Year, the Gymnast of
the Year (all-around competitor), Specialist of the Year (competitor in three or fewer events), and the Freshman/Newcomer of the Year (a student-athlete participating in her first season of competition in the Pac-12)
in women’s gymnastics. (6/87, 5/91, 6/92, 2/99, 6/00, 6/12, 8/15)
5. Meetings of Coaches.
There shall be an annual meeting of the women’s gymnastics coaches with the date and site to be established by
the Conference office. The attendance of each head coach is mandatory. (5/89, 5/91, 6/92, 6/05, 10/11, 10/12,
7/19)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 152

SPR 10-1

Women’s Lacrosse Regulations

SPR 10-2-b

CHAPTER 10—WOMEN’S LACROSSE REGULATIONS
1. Playing Season Policies.
a. Championship Determination.
The team with the highest won-loss percentage for all conference games shall be the Conference champion.
This shall apply even in the event one or more teams cannot play its entire 10-game schedule. If that percentage is shared by more than one team, a co-championship shall exist. (8/17)
b. NCAA Automatic Qualifier.
The winner of the post-season Conference Championships shall represent the Conference in the NCAA
Division I Women’s Lacrosse Championships. (8/17)
c. Conference Schedule.
Each team shall schedule one home contest and one road contest against each team in the Conference.
The scheduling of Conference contests shall take priority over the scheduling of non-Conference contests. (8/17)
(1) Rescheduling Policy.
Should circumstances prevent the use of an institution’s home field, every attempt shall be made to
play games at an alternate site to be determined by the host institution. The date of a scheduled game
may be adjusted by mutual agreement of the two institutions if circumstances prevent the use of an
institution’s home field and no alternate site is available. (8/17)
(2) Practice Policy.
The host institution shall secure a practice facility for the visiting team the day of, or the days before
a scheduled contest. Additionally, the host institution shall make the competition field available for a
walk-through the day of or the day before the scheduled contest. Prior arrangements must be made
through the head coach and/or event management administrator of the host institution at least two
weeks in advance. The visiting team shall make every effort to notify the host institution’s head coach
and/or event management administrator of any change to use the practice facility. (8/17)
2. Match Policies.
a. Competition Site.
All Conference contests are to be played on the field of the scheduled home team, except by mutual agreement of the appropriate athletics department administrators. When, because of extenuating circumstances,
a substitute home field is required, the appropriate athletics department administrator of the home team is
required to notify all affected teams at least five days in advance of the scheduled contests. (8/17)
b. Game Times.
For non-televised games, the home team shall establish the game times. For Sunday games, the start shall
be early enough to allow the visiting team to return home the same day. Game times for non-televised
games may be changed by mutual consent of the participating coaches. Game times for televised games
shall be established by the Conference office. (8/17)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 153

Women’s Lacrosse Regulations

SPR 10-2-c

SPR 10-2-c-(8)

c. Playing Rules.
Contests shall be conducted under the NCAA Lacrosse Rules except as modified below. (8/17)
(1) Game Ball.
The official game ball for all Conference contests shall be the official ball of the NCAA women’s lacrosse
championships. (8/17)
(2) Artificial Noisemakers.
The use of artificial noisemakers, air horns, and electronic amplifiers shall be prohibited at Conference
contests. (8/17)
(3) Squad Limit.
The travel squad limit shall be 32 student-athletes for the visiting team and there shall be no squad limit
for the home team. There shall be no travel squad limit for visiting teams traveling over spring break.
(8/17, 12/18)
(4) Scorekeepers and Timers.
The host institution shall provide a well-trained and knowledgeable scorekeeper for all home Conference contests. A current NCAA rulebook and the NCAA Carding/Score Verification Form shall be
available at the scorer’s table. (8/17)
(5) Scouting Reports.
For in-season competition, no verbal or written scouting report on Conference members shall be communicated to non-Conference institutions. (12/17)
(6) Tickets for Visiting Institution.
A maximum of 50 tickets shall be available for the visiting team at no cost, administered via a pass list
(see ER 1-8). (8/17)
(7) Video Policies.
Conference members shall not provide video of fall games to non-conference institutions. (12/17)
(8) Pregame Warm-Up.
The following pre-game timing countdown shall be used for all games, but may be altered upon the
mutual agreement of the coaches of the participating teams. (8/17)
Time to
Start Game
65:00
20:00
15:00
15:00
13:00
8:00
5:00
0:00

Action
Pre-Game Countdown clock begins
Field open for warm-up
Coaches meeting
Captains meeting
Field cleared
Stick check after coaches meeting
National Anthem
Introduction of visiting team/coaches
Introduction of visiting team/coaches
Game begins (6/17)
2022-23 Handbook • Page 154

Women’s Lacrosse Regulations

SPR 10-3

SPR 10-5-a-(1)

3. Conference Championships.
a. Date and Site.
The Conference Women’s Lacrosse Championships shall take place on Wednesday through Saturday the
week of the NCAA women’s lacrosse selection date. The championships shall be conducted on the following rotational basis, with the host bearing the responsibility of all expenses associated with hosting.
(8/17, 12/21)
Year
2022-23
2023-24
2024-25
2025-26

Host Institution
California
USC
Colorado
Oregon

Year
Host Institution
2026-27
Stanford
2027-28
TBD
2028-29
TBD
2029-30
Arizona State
(6/17, 7/20, 7/22)

b. Format.
The Conference Championship shall consist of a six team, single-elimination tournament format. (8/17)
c. Maximum Effort.
Per AR 4-4, Conference members are expected to compete in Conference championships in sports they
sponsor, and coaches are expected to attempt to field their strongest team to compete in single site Conference championships. (7/22)
d. Squad Size.
There shall be a squad limit of 32 for the Conference Championships. (8/17)
4. Meetings of Coaches.
There shall be an annual meeting of the women’s lacrosse coaches to be held on a date and time established
by the Conference office. The attendance of each head coach is mandatory. (8/17, 7/20)
5. Awards.

The Conference coaches shall select recipients for all lacrosse awards. (8/17)
a. All-Conference Team.
The All-Conference team shall consist of 12 first team and 12 second team members. Coaches shall rank
their top 30 choices, indicating their first choice with 30 points, their second with 29 points, etc. The
players having the highest point totals by position (4 attackers, 3 midfielders, 4 defenders, 1 goalie) shall
be named to the All-Conference first team and the next 12, regardless of position, will be named to the
All-Conference second team. First team players shall be provided an award from the Conference. Second
team players shall receive a certificate. Coaches may not vote for their own players. (8/17)
(1) Nomination Process.
After the conclusion of the Conference Championships, coaches shall nominate their players for the
All-Conference team, with no more than 12 submissions. (8/17)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 155
Updated 7/1/22

SPR 10-5-b

Women’s Lacrosse Regulations

SPR 10-5-b

b. Individual Awards.
Individual awards shall be provided to the Attacker, Midfielder, and Defensive Player of the Year, Goalkeeper of the Year, Freshman of the Year, and Coach of the Year. The Attacker, Midfielder, Defensive, Goalkeeper, and Freshman Player of the Year shall be the player who accumulates the most points by position
in the All-Conference team balloting. Each coach shall list two choices for Coach of the Year, with the first
choice receiving three points and the second receiving one point. (8/17, 12/18)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 156

Men’s and Women’s Rowing Regulations

SPR 11-1

SPR 11-1-c-(1)

CHAPTER 11—MEN’S AND WOMEN’S ROWING REGULATIONS
1. Playing Season Policies.
a. Championship Determination.
The Conference shall determine a men’s rowing champion and a women’s rowing champion. The champions shall be the institution with the most points as determined by the order of finish of the Conference
crews at the finals of the Conference Rowing Championships in the following eight events: Men’s Varsity 8,
Men’s Second Varsity 8, Men’s Freshman/Novice 8, or Men’s Third Varsity 8, Women’s Varsity 8, Women’s
Second Varsity 8, Women’s Third Varsity Eight and Women’s Varsity 4. (10/02, 10/05, 10/08, 10/09, 12/14)
Frosh/novice 8
Place
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

Varsity 8
M
W
32
21
28
18
24
15
20
12
16
9
12
6
8
3
4
—
0
—

SV 8
M
21
18
15
12
9
6
3
0

W
12
10
8
6
4
2
—
—

or M 3rd V8
M
W
3.5
14
3
12
2.5
10
2
8
1.5
6
1
4
0.5
2
—
0
—

Varsity 4
W
6
5
4
3
2
1
—
—

In case of a tie in the total number of points in the team standings, the institution with the better-finishing
boat in the varsity 8 race shall be awarded the higher place-finish. (6/87, 6/92, 6/94, 12/94, 6/96, 2/99,
1/00, 10/09, 11/16)
b. NCAA Automatic Qualifier.
The Conference women’s rowing team champion shall be the team with the highest point total in the Varsity 8, Second Varsity 8, and Varsity 4 events and shall receive the Automatic Qualifying bid to represent
the Conference in the NCAA Division I Women’s Rowing Championships. (8/21)
c. Conference Schedule.
Each team shall meet every other Conference opponent annually. At Conference women’s rowing dual races Varsity 8, Second Varsity 8, and Varsity 4 events shall be conducted. At Conference men’s and women’s
rowing duals, a minimum of one U.S. Rowing official shall be on site and be paid $100 (6/92, 10/04, 6/10,
10/12, 2/17)
(1) Rescheduling Policies.
If an event is cancelled prior to a team’s departure from campus, it may be rescheduled for a subsequent weekend when all participants are available for competition. (7/92)
If an event is cancelled after participants have arrived at the competition site, it may be rescheduled for
the following day (if the following day is a Sunday) or at an alternate site on the same day. If the following day is not a Sunday, the event may be held at an alternate venue, or its format may be altered. If the
event still cannot be completed, it may be rescheduled for a subsequent weekend when all participants
are available for competition. The event shall not be rescheduled unless mutually agreed upon by the
participants. (7/92, 6/99)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 157

Men’s and Women’s Rowing Regulations

SPR 11-2

SPR 11-2-d-(2)

2. Conference Championships.
a. Date and Site.
The Conference Men’s and Women’s Rowing Championships shall be held on the Sunday two weekends
prior to the NCAA Women’s Rowing Championships. (12/91, 6/92, 6/94, 5/97, 2/99, 6/07, 11/07, 10/09,
10/12)
b. Eligible Crews.
All Conference intercollegiate crews shall receive automatic entry in the Conference Championships. Men’s
club teams from Conference institutions shall declare the intent to participate in the championships by providing a non-refundable entry fee by February 1. (6/94, 5/97, 6/07, 10/11. 12/13)
(1) Fine.
A monetary fine shall be imposed for non-compliance with the deadline for submission of entry fees.
(6/17)
c. Maximum Effort.
Per AR 4-4, Conference members are expected to compete in Conference championships in sports they
sponsor, and coaches are expected to attempt to field their strongest team to compete in single site
Conference championships. (7/22)
d. Open-weight.
In order to compete at the Pac-12 Championships, a student-athlete must be a member of only the openweight squad from the first competition of the year until the Conference Championships. (12/14)
(1) Men’s Freshman/Novice Eight.
Any Conference institution may enter the Men’s Freshman/Novice Eight event with student-athletes
who meet the criteria of (a) eligible freshmen, as certified by that institution’s faculty athletics representative or (b) “novice” rowers, except that a student-athlete who is age 21 or older on the day of the
Championships may not compete in that event unless he has not previously been involved in any rowing competition prior to enrolling in his institution. (12/94, 5/97, 6/00, 6/07, 10/09)
(2) Varsity Four/Varsity Eight Entries.
(a) Men.
All institutions with an entry in the men’s varsity four race also must have an entry in the men’s
varsity eight race. Institutions that are unable to field a men’s varsity eight boat may petition the
Regatta Management Committee for entry into the men’s varsity four race only. A petition must
be submitted by the institution to the Regatta Management Committee prior to the entry due date.
(6/98, 2/99, 6/00)
(b) Women.
All institutions with an entry in the women’s varsity four race also must have an entry in the
women’s varsity eight and the women’s second varsity eight races. Petitions will not be accepted
for entry into the women’s varsity four. (6/98, 2/99, 6/00, 10/02)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 158
Updated 7/1/22

SPR 11-2-d-(3)

Men’s and Women’s Rowing Regulations

SPR 11-2-h

(3) Conference Men’s Club Teams.
Conference member institutions that enter men’s club teams in the Conference Championships shall
provide certification to the Conference office that all student-athletes participating in the Championships are enrolled as full-time students and have not competed for more than four seasons within five
calendar years of the date of their initial full-time collegiate enrollment. (See NCAA 14.2, NCAA 14.2.1,
NCAA 14.1.7.2) (6/06, 4/08, 6/08, 10/11)
(4) Novice Rower.
A novice rower is defined as a student-athlete in his or her first year of collegiate rowing. A second-year
collegiate rower may retain novice status only by meeting any of the following requirements:
(a) The student-athlete received a hardship waiver for the first year of collegiate rowing. (6/96,
6/00)
(b) The FARC determines that the student-athlete could have been granted a hardship waiver for
the first year of participation, but for the fact that the student-athlete did not compete. Institutions
may then use this determination to assign novice rower status to the student-athlete. (10/02)
(c) The student-athlete practiced in the fall and/or spring, but did not compete in the first year of
collegiate rowing. (6/96, 6/00, 10/04, 12/13)
e. Expense Sharing.
Travel expenses (airfare and ground transportation) for each institution’s intercollegiate program(s), and
any event expenses not defrayed by entry fees, shall be shared equally by those institutions with an intercollegiate team(s) participating in the Championships. Travel expenses may be paid for up to ten rowers
per eight-seat boat (i.e., one eight—10 rowers, two eights—20 rowers) and up to five rowers per four-seat
boat to a maximum of 43 rowers per men’s or women’s squad. (6/94, 6/97, 6/99, 4/01, 4/08, 10/11, 6/17,
7/19, 7/20)
f.

Regatta Management.

Race day management shall be directed by the Regatta Management Committee, which shall be comprised
of two voting members (a Conference men’s rowing coach, and a Conference women’s rowing coach) and
additional limited-voting members (the regatta coordinator, the site coordinator, and the Conference coordinator, who shall be charged with breaking a tie vote between the coaches). Coaches of the top two seeded
boats in the varsity eight races may change the lane assignments no later than 10 minutes before the start
of the race because of weather conditions. (Women) The only lane change option is to flip the entire field
with the top-seeded boat moving from lane one to lane seven, the No. 2 boat moving from lane two to lane
six, etc (2/99, 6/00, 12/13)
g. Schedule.
The Championships schedule shall be approved by the coaches during the annual September meeting. The
order of men’s and women’s races shall alternate each year. The last race of the day shall begin no later than
2:00 p.m. (10/09, 10/11, 10/12, 12/18)
h. Seedings.
Each coach shall ensure that lineups for each regular-season competition are included with results on its
website no later than 14 days before the Conference Championships. Each coach shall cast a ballot ranking
the boats, except his or her own, entered in each race. The ballots will be tallied to determine race seedings, and will be provided to the coaches by 10:00 a.m. the Monday prior to the Championships. Seeding
appeals must be submitted in writing to the Conference office no later than 10 a.m., the Tuesday before the
Championships. If an appeal(s) is submitted, all coaches shall join a predetermined conference call. The
2022-23 Handbook • Page 159

SPR 11-2-h

Men’s and Women’s Rowing Regulations

SPR 11-5-a

coach filing the appeal and the coach(es) of the team(s) involved in the appeal shall join the call to provide
information to the group and then will be asked to leave the call. The remaining coaches will vote on the
appeal(s) related to the Championships in which his or her team will compete. Each appeal will be evaluated and voted on separately using the aforementioned process. (5/97, 10/03, 6/08, 10/10, 10/11, 10/12)
3. Awards.
The Conference men’s and women’s rowing coaches shall select recipients for all rowing awards. All competitors who participate in the Conference Rowing Championships shall be eligible for all-Conference honors,
provided the individual (as opposed to the team) is certified as eligible by the faculty athletics representative.
Coaches shall designate their all-Conference rowers but may not vote for themselves for the Coach of the Year
award. Balloting for all team and individual awards shall be conducted by the Conference office the week after
the Championships. (12/91, 6/92, 6/94, 10/08, 12/14)
a. All-Conference Team.
An all-Conference team shall be selected for both men’s and women’s rowing and each member shall be
provided with an award from the Conference. Members of the all-Conference rowing teams shall be based
upon each institution’s finish in the varsity 8 championship race at the Conference Championships. The
Conference champion shall provide four members of the all-Conference team, the second-place crew shall
provide three members, and the third-place finisher shall provide two. All other participating Conference
crews shall provide one rower each. (12/89, 6/92)
b. Individual Awards.
An individual award from the Conference office shall be provided to the men’s rowing Coach of the Year;
the women’s rowing Coach of the Year; the men’s rowing Athlete of the Year; the women’s rowing Athlete
of the Year; the men’s rowing Newcomer of the Year; the women’s rowing Newcomer of the Year; and the
members of the first-, second-, and third-place boats in the men’s varsity 8, men’s second varsity 8, men’s
frosh/novice 8, men’s 4, women’s varsity 8, women’s second varsity 8, women’s novice 8, and women’s 4
races at the Conference Championships. Balloting conducted for individual awards shall use a weighted
voting method. The Athlete of the Year and Newcomer of the Year awards shall be given to the top votegetters based upon coaches’ nominations. Nominations for the Athlete of the Year must have competed
in the Varsity 8 race at the Conference Championships. (12/89, 6/92, 5/97, 2/99, 1/00, 4/01, 10/02, 6/05,
6/07, 4/08, 6/10, 6/11)
4. Meetings of Coaches.
There shall be an annual meeting of the rowing coaches to be held on a date and time established by the Conference office. The attendance of each head coach is mandatory. Major changes in the format the Conference
uses to conduct its rowing championships, such as changes in the rules of racing or adding or deleting events,
must be considered by the coaches during the annual fall meeting and approved by the Council. Men’s club
programs from Conference institutions participating in the championships shall have the right to vote only
on rules pertaining to Conference awards and regatta management (other than expense sharing). (6/92, 6/95,
5/97, 2/99, 10/11, 10/12, 7/20)
5. Additional Rules Applicable to Men’s Rowing.
a. NCAA Rules.
All NCAA rules that apply to women’s rowing shall apply to intercollegiate (as opposed to club) men’s
rowing programs, with the following exceptions: (10/05, 6/06)
(1) Student-athletes are not required to complete an NCAA drug-testing consent form. (6/09)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 160

SPR 11-5-a

Men’s and Women’s Rowing Regulations

SPR 11-5-b

(2) Students whose first full-time collegiate enrollment occurred before the Fall 2006 term shall be
required to meet the NCAA satisfactory progress rule in effect for the 2002-03 academic year (e.g.,
fall-to-fall or averaging option). NCAA rules pertaining to the “specific degree program”, percent of
degree (25-50-75), minimum grade-point average (90-95), regular academic year (75-25), progress toward degree (40-60-80), term-by-term grade-point average checks, six units per term check, and limits
on remedial units shall not apply. (6/86, 12/88, 12/92, 6/00, 6/03, 6/06)
(3) There shall a limit of 14.5 on the value (equivalency) of financial aid awards that an institution may
provide in any academic year to counters. (10/05, 10/10)
(4) Participation in the Henley Royal Regatta may occur annually. If an institution participates only in
the Henley Royal Regatta during an overseas trip, that trip shall not count as the institution’s once-infour-years foreign tour opportunity. (6/06, 6/08)
(5) Beginning with the 2006-07 academic year, it is permissible for institutions to start a new four-year
cycle for foreign tours. (6/06)
(6) Institutions may provide benefits to student-athletes consistent with the parameters of the NCAA
Student-Athlete Opportunity Fund but may not spend Student-Athlete Opportunity Fund monies to
do so. (9/10)
b. Eligibility Reinstatement.
In the event of a violation of an NCAA rule that adversely affects a student-athlete’s eligibility in the sport
of men’s rowing, the institution shall declare the student-athlete ineligible, and promptly notify the Conference office. Reinstatement of eligibility may be sought pursuant to the procedures established in CER
2. The Pac-12 Compliance & Enforcement Committee shall consider eligibility issues for men’s rowing, as
needed. (6/00, 10/05, 7/20)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 161

Men’s Soccer Regulations

SPR 12-1

SPR 12-1-b-(1)

CHAPTER 12—MEN’S SOCCER REGULATIONS
1. Playing Season Policies.
a. Championship Determination.
The team with the highest point total during Conference play shall be the Conference champion. This shall
apply even in the event one or more teams cannot play the entire Conference schedule. Each Conference
win shall be awarded three points, a Conference tie shall result in both teams being awarded one point,
and no points shall be awarded for a Conference loss. If that point total is shared by more than one team, a
co-championship shall exist. (6/95, 6/96, 6/00, 6/04, 10/04, 10/09)
b. NCAA Automatic Qualifier.
The team with the highest point total during Conference play shall represent the Conference in the NCAA
Division I Men’s Soccer Championship. (10/09)
(1) Championship Ties.
In the event of a point tie between two teams for the Conference championship, the team with the highest point total based upon the results of the in-season head-to-head Conference competition between
the two teams shall represent the Conference as its automatic qualifier in the NCAA Division I Men’s
Soccer Championship. If the teams have equal point totals in head-to-head Conference competition,
then the team having won the most matches in Conference play shall be declared the automatic qualifier. If a tie still exists, each team’s record shall be compared against the team occupying the highest
position in the final regular-season standings, and then continuing down through the standings until
one team gains an advantage. When arriving at another group of tied teams while comparing records,
each team’s record against the collective tied teams as a group (prior to that group’s own tie-breaking
procedure) shall be used, rather than the performance against individual tied teams. If a tie still exists,
the team having the highest goal differential (goals for minus goals against) in all Conference matches
shall be declared the automatic qualifier. If a tie still exists, the team having the highest number of goals
in all Conference matches shall be declared the automatic qualifier. If a tie still exists, the team having
the lowest number of goals in all Conference matches shall be declared the automatic qualifier. If a tie
still exists, the winner of a coin toss by the Commissioner shall be declared the automatic qualifier.
(6/96, 6/99, 6/00, 6/02, 6/04, 10/04, 6/10)
In the event of a point tie between more than two teams for the Conference championship, the following formula shall be used to determine the Conference’s automatic qualifier for the NCAA Division I
Men’s Soccer Championship: (5/97, 6/00, 6/04, 10/04)
(a) The record in regular-season Conference play of the tied teams will be determined against the
other teams with which it is tied. The team with the highest point total based on the results of their
in-season head-to-head competition shall be the automatic qualifier. Each Conference win shall be
awarded three points, a Conference tie shall result in both teams being awarded one point, and no
points shall be awarded for a Conference loss. If at this point only two teams remain, head-to-head
results shall be used in determining the automatic qualifier. (5/97, 6/99, 6/04, 10/04)
(b) If a tie still exists between multiple teams, the team having the highest number of wins in all
Conference matches between the tied teams shall be the automatic qualifier. If at this point only
two teams remain, head-to-head results shall be used in determining the automatic qualifier. (5/97,
6/99, 6/04, 10/04)
(c) If a tie still exists between multiple teams, each team’s record shall be compared against the
team occupying the highest position in the final regular season standings, and then continuing
down through the standings until one team gains an advantage. When arriving at another group
of tied teams while comparing records, each team’s record against the collective tied teams as a
2022-23 Handbook • Page 162

Men’s Soccer Regulations

SPR 12-1-b-(1)

SPR 12-1-c-(4)

group (prior to that group’s own tie-breaking procedure) shall be used, rather than the performance against individual tied teams. If at this point only two teams remain, head-to-head results
shall be used in determining the automatic qualifier. (6/02, 6/04, 10/04)
(d) If a tie still exists between multiple teams, the team having the highest goal differential (goals
for minus goals against) in all Conference matches shall be the automatic qualifier. If at this point
only two teams remain, head-to-head results shall be used in determining the automatic qualifier.
(5/97, 6/99, 6/04, 10/04)
(e) If a tie still exists, the winner of a coin toss by the Commissioner shall be the automatic qualifier. (5/97, 6/04, 10/04)
c. Conference Schedule.
Each team shall schedule one home contest and one road contest against each other team in the Conference.
Conference contests shall be played Thursday and Sunday. There will be a bye week in the third week of
the Conference schedule for all teams by moving the third week games from the existing schedules to the
fourth week of the regular season. Coaches may mutually agree to move those matches to other dates, provided all travel partners agree. The scheduling of Conference contests shall take priority over the scheduling of non-Conference contests. See also AR 2-2-a. (6/00, 6/02, 6/04, 10/04, 6/18, 7/20, 8/21)
(1) Rescheduling Policy.
Should circumstances prevent the use of an institution’s home field or the completion of a game, every
attempt shall be made to play games at an alternate site to be determined by the host institution. The
date of a scheduled game may be adjusted by mutual agreement of the two institutions if circumstances prevent the use of an institution’s home field and no alternate site is available on the originallyscheduled date. If the contest has a bearing on the determination of the Conference championship,
and/or postseason NCAA selection, the Commissioner in consultation with the directors of athletics
or designated administrative representative (non-coaching) of the involved institutions will determine
the date and site for the makeup or completion of the game. (6/95, 7/22)
(2) Practice Policy.
The host institution shall make every effort to secure a practice facility for the visiting team as requested the day before and/or the days between a scheduled contest. Prior arrangements must be made
through the head coach and/or event management administrator of the host institution at least two
weeks in advance. The visiting team shall make every effort to notify the host institution’s head coach
and/or event management administrator of any change to use the practice facility. (6/95, 5/97, 8/16)
(3) Sequence of Opponents.
Each year’s home and away series shall alternate the order of opponents, reversing the order in subsequent years. (7/19)
(4) Traditional Rivals.
For the purposes of determining squad limits in the sport of men’s soccer, traditional rivals will include
UCLA/San Diego State and Washington/Oregon State in addition to Cal/Stanford. (7/22)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 163
Updated 7/1/22

SPR 12-2

Men’s Soccer Regulations

SPR 12-2-e-(2)

2. Game Policies.
a. Artificial Noisemakers.
Artificial noisemakers are permitted at Pac-12 soccer games, in accordance with NCAA playing rules.
(8/14).
b. Kickoff Times.
The second game of a non-televised Thursday night doubleheader shall begin no later than 7:30 p.m.,
with a minimum of two-and-a-half hours between the kickoff times of the two matches. For non-televised
games, Sunday doubleheaders shall be played at noon and 2:30 p.m., unless the competing teams mutually
agree to a different kickoff time. Non-televised Sunday contests which are not part of a doubleheader shall
begin no later than 2:00 p.m. Start times for televised games will be established by the Conference office.
The coin toss shall be conducted 01:30 prior to the lineup for kick-off at all games at Pac-12 venues. (6/04,
6/07, 8/13, 12/13)
c. Officiating.
(1) Officials.
The Pac-12 Coordinator of Soccer Officials shall assign referees to all soccer contests (see AR 6).
(2) Expenses.
Fees and expenses shall be established by the Commissioner (see AR 6-5). At the conclusion of the
season, total officiating expenses for Conference games shall be shared equally by member institutions
with men’s soccer programs. (8/16)
d. Facility Requirements.
If a locker room is not available, the host institution shall provide the visiting team with a tent with sides,
chairs, and a dry-erase board within reasonable proximity to the field for pregame, halftime, and postgame
meetings. (6/17)
e. Playing Rules.
Conference contests shall be conducted under the NCAA Men’s and Women’s Soccer Rules except as modified below. (6/95)
(1) Game Ball.
The ball to be used for all Conference regular-season competition shall be the top of the line of the chosen brand, shall be leather hand-stitched, and shall be selected by the host institution. (6/95)
(2) Uniform Colors.
Jerseys and shorts shall be the same color. The following uniform colors shall be worn for contests,
other than those between traditional rivals: on Fridays, the home team shall wear a dark color and the
road team shall wear a light color; on Sundays the home team shall wear a light color and the road team
shall wear a dark color. For traditional rival contests, the home team must select its uniform color and
notify its opponent of its choice 72 hours prior to kickoff. (10/00, 6/12)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 164

SPR 12-2-f
f.

Men’s Soccer Regulations

SPR 12-3-a

Pregame Warmup.

Unless the coaches of the competing teams mutually agree to a different schedule, the field shall be available for warmup by the competing teams a minimum of one hour prior to game time (or the first game of a
doubleheader) and one half-hour prior to the second game of a doubleheader. (6/95)
g. Scorekeepers and Timers.
The host institution shall provide one well-trained and knowledgeable person to compile statistics and one
person to serve as the timer for each contest. The host institution’s event management shall provide space
at the scorer’s table for a visiting statistician. The host institution shall provide the NCAA statistics form
and scoresheet to the visiting team within a half hour of the end of each game. (6/95, 5/97)
h. Scouting.
Conference coaches shall not scout in-person at any Conference contest. Except as required in SPR 10-2-h,
it is impermissible for a Conference institution to provide video copies of any of its Conference contests to
other Conference institutions. Conference soccer coaches shall not give scouting reports of any kind about
a Conference team to any non-Conference institution. (10/00, 6/06, 6/07)
i.

Squad Limit.

For non-traditional rival Conference contests, the travel squad limit for the visiting team shall be 22 student-athletes and there shall be no squad limit for the home team; each team shall designate in writing prior
to each contest no more than 22 participants from its squad who may participate in the contest. There shall
be no squad limit or participant limit for contests involving traditional rivals. (6/00, 6/05, 7/22)
j.

Video Policies.

For Conference contests, the host institution shall provide a video copy of the game to the visiting institution immediately after the conclusion of the contest.
Video of all non-conference contests, including exhibitions, shall be uploaded to the Conference video exchange platform, Spiideo, by 5:00 p.m. on Monday after the weekend’s games. For Conference games, the
coach’s video of the game (not the television broadcast, if any) shall be uploaded to the server by 12 noon
local time the day following the game. For Conference contests, the host institution shall be responsible for
uploading the video. (6/00, 6/01, 6/02, 6/07, 6/12, 8/14, 8/16, 7/19, 7/20)
3. Awards.
The Conference soccer coaches shall select recipients for all soccer awards. Balloting shall be conducted following the completion of the Conference schedule. Coaches may not vote for themselves or for their own players
for any of the awards. (6/95, 6/00, 6/02)
a. All Conference Team.
The all-Conference team shall consist of an eleven-player first team (including one or more goalkeepers), an
eleven-player second team (10 field players and one goalkeeper), and eleven players (10 field players and
one goalkeeper) who shall be accorded honorable mention status. Using a ballot provided by the Conference office, coaches shall nominate up to 22 players from their team and rank the top 10 in rank order. A
conference call will be conducted with all head coaches to discuss the top 10 from each team, who will then
be considered for first team. After the balloting is concluded by the Tuesday prior to the last Conference
contest, the players with the eleven highest point totals shall be named to the all-Conference first team. The
next 11 players (including one goalkeeper) with the highest point totals shall be named to the all-Conference second team. The 11 remaining players (including one goalkeeper) who received the most points in
the balloting shall be accorded honorable mention status. Members of the first team shall be provided an
2022-23 Handbook • Page 165

SPR 12-3-a

Men’s Soccer Regulations

SPR 12-4

award from the Conference. Members of the second team shall be provided a certificate by the Conference.
Honorable mention selections shall be recognized in a Conference media release. Results of the voting shall
be released to the in-stitutions the next day, with public release following the conclusion of Conference
play. (6/95, 2/99, 6/99, 6/00, 6/01, 6/02, 6/10, 8/15, 8/16, 7/20)
b. Individual Awards.
An individual award from the Conference shall be provided to the Coach of the Year, the Player of the Year,
Defensive Player of the Year, Offensive Player of the Year, and the Freshman of the Year in men’s soccer.
Coaches shall assign three points to their first choice and one point to their second choice for Coach of the
Year. Winners of individual awards shall be determined by a ballot comprised of individuals nominated by
coaches, using a weighted voting system with three points for first choice and one point for second choice.
Each coach may nominate a maximum of two individuals from his own team for each of the individual
awards. (6/95, 5/97, 6/00, 6/02, 8/14, 8/21)
4. Meetings of Coaches.
There shall be an annual meeting of the men’s soccer coaches to be held on a date and time established by the
Conference office. The attendance of each head coach is mandatory. (6/95, 6/00, 6/12)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 166

Women’s Soccer Regulations

SPR 13-1

SPR 13-1-b

CHAPTER 13—WOMEN’S SOCCER REGULATIONS
1. Playing Season Policies.
a. Championship Determination.
The team with the highest point total during Conference play shall be the Conference champion. This shall
apply even in the event one or more teams cannot play the entire Conference schedule. Each Conference
win shall be awarded three points, a Conference tie shall result in both teams being awarded one point,
and no points shall be awarded for a Conference loss. If that point total is shared by more than one team, a
co-championship shall exist. (6/95, 6/96, 6/00, 10/09)
b. NCAA Automatic Qualifier.
The team with the highest point total during Conference play shall represent the Conference in the NCAA
Division I Women’s Soccer Championship. (10/09)
(1) Championship Ties.
In the event of a point tie between two teams for the Conference championship, if one team was the
winner of the Conference match against the other team, it shall represent the Conference as its automatic qualifier in the NCAA Division I Women’s Soccer Championship. If the teams tied in head-to-head
Conference competition, the team having won the most matches in Conference play shall be declared
the automatic qualifier. If a tie still exists, the tied teams’ record in regular-season Conference play
against the next highest placed team(s) in the Conference standings shall be determined, including any
team(s) already eliminated through the tie-breaking procedure. This procedure shall continue through
an evaluation of competitive records of the tied teams against all teams in the Conference in the order
of their placement in the standings until the tie is broken. In the event of a tie among two or more teams
lower in the standings when comparing records, each team’s combined record against the two or more
tied teams shall be determined. If a tie still exists, the winner of a coin toss by the Commissioner shall
be declared the automatic qualifier. (6/96, 6/99, 6/00, 6/06)
In the event of a point tie between more than two teams for the Conference championship, the following formula shall be used to determine the Conference’s automatic qualifier for the NCAA Division I
Women’s Soccer Championship: (5/97, 6/00)
(a) The record in regular-season Conference play of the tied teams will be determined against the
other teams with which it is tied. The team with the highest point total based on the results of their
in-season head-to-head competition shall be the automatic qualifier. Each Conference win shall be
awarded three points, a Conference tie shall result in both teams being awarded one point, and no
points shall be awarded for a Conference loss. If at this point only two teams remain, head-to-head
results shall be used in determining the automatic qualifier. (5/97, 6/99)
(b) If a tie still exists between multiple teams, the team having the highest number of wins in all
Conference matches between the tied teams shall be the automatic qualifier. If at this point only
two teams remain, head-to-head results shall be used in determining the automatic qualifier. (5/97,
6/99)
(c) If a tie still exists, the winner of a coin toss by the Commissioner shall be the automatic qualifier. (5/97)
b. Conference Schedule.
Each team shall schedule one contest against each other team in the Conference during the final seven
weekends of the regular season using a travel partner format of Arizona-Arizona State, California-Stanford, UCLA-USC, Oregon-Oregon State, Washington-Washington State, and Colorado-Utah. Conference
2022-23 Handbook • Page 167

SPR 13-1-b

Women’s Soccer Regulations

SPR 13-2-e

contests shall be played Thursday and Sunday. Biannually, a team shall alternate with its travel partner its
lead-off opponent in a given weekend. The scheduling of Conference contests shall take priority over the
scheduling of non-Conference contests. See also AR 2-2-a. (6/95, 6/99, 6/00, 10/10, 12/14, 7/20, 8/21)
(1) Rescheduling Policy.
Should circumstances prevent the use of an institution’s home field, every attempt shall be made to
play games at an alternate site to be determined by the host institution. The date of a scheduled game
may be adjusted by mutual agreement of the two institutions if circumstances prevent the use of an
institution’s home field and no alternate site is available on the originally-scheduled date. If the contest
has a bearing on the determination of the Conference championship, and/or postseason NCAA selection, the Commissioner in consultation with the directors of athletics or designated administrative representative (non-coaching) of the involved institutions will determine the date and site for the makeup
or completion of the game. (6/95, 7/22)
(2) Practice Policy.
The host institution shall secure a practice facility for the visiting team the day of or the days before
a scheduled contest. Additionally, the host institution shall make the competition field available for a
walk-through without a ball the day of or the day before the scheduled contest. Prior arrangements
must be made through the head coach and/or event management administrator of the host institution
at least two weeks in advance. The visiting team shall make every effort to notify the host institution’s
head coach and/or event management administrator of any change to use the practice facility. (6/95,
5/97, 8/13, 8/16)
2. Game Policies.
a. Artificial Noisemakers.
Artificial noisemakers are permitted at Pac-12 soccer games, in accordance with NCAA playing rules. (8/14)
b. Bands.
Visiting bands, not to exceed 25, plus the director, shall be admitted free of charge. Home or visiting bands
(or any component thereof) are allowed to play only during timeouts, after goals, halftime, between games,
and before and after competition. Bands shall be seated behind their respective team’s bench, or across the
field (6/11).
c. Card Accumulation.
The Conference office shall track the accumulation of cautions (yellow cards) and ejections (red cards) for
student-athletes and coaches and provide the information to coaches only if student athletes are in danger
of suspension. (6/06, 7/20)
d. Kickoff Times.
The second game of a Thursday or Friday night doubleheader shall begin no later than 7:30 p.m., with a
minimum of two-and-a-half hours between the kickoff times of the two matches. (6/07, 7/20)
e. Facility Requirements.
If a locker room is not available, the host institution shall provide the visiting team with a tent with sides,
chairs, and a dry-erase board within reasonable proximity to the field for pregame, halftime, and postgame
meetings. (6/17)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 168
Updated 7/1/22

SPR 13-2-f
f.

Women’s Soccer Regulations

SPR 13-2-k

Officials.

See AR 6 and AR 6-17.
g. Playing Rules.
Conference contests shall be conducted under the NCAA Men’s and Women’s Soccer Rules except as modified below. (6/95)
(1) Ball Persons.
A minimum of four ball persons over the age of 10 shall be available for each contest. (6/03)
(2) Game Ball.
The ball to be used for all Conference regular-season competition shall be the top of the line of the chosen brand, shall be leather hand-stitched, and shall be selected by the host institution. A minimum of
five balls shall be used during each contest. One ball shall be in play, one shall be placed behind each
goal, and one shall be placed on each side of the field at the midstripe. (6/95, 6/05)
(3) Jersey Colors.
The home team shall wear dark uniforms on Thursday and light uniforms on Sunday. (6/05, 7/20)
h. Pregame Activities.
Unless the coaches of the competing teams mutually agree to a different schedule, the field shall be available for warmup by the competing teams a minimum of one hour prior to game time (or the first game of a
doubleheader) and one half-hour prior to the second game of a doubleheader. (6/95, 6/06, 6/07)
i.

Scorekeepers and Timers.

The host institution shall provide one well-trained and knowledgeable person to compile statistics and one
person to serve as the timer for each contest. The host institution’s event management shall provide space
at the scorer’s table for a visiting statistician. The host institution shall provide the NCAA statistics form
and scoresheet to the visiting team within a half hour of the end of each game. (6/95, 5/97)
j.

Scouting.

Conference soccer coaches may give written or verbal scouting reports about a Conference team to another
Conference institution but shall not send film or videotape of a Conference school except as specified in
SPR 11-2-j. In-person scouting of contests between two Conference teams is prohibited. Conference soccer
coaches shall not send film or videotape or give written or verbal scouting reports about a Conference team
to any non-Conference institution. (6/00, 6/06)
k. Squad Limit.
There shall be no squad limit for either team in contests involving traditional rivals.
For other Conference contests, the travel squad limit shall be 22 student-athletes for the visiting team and
there shall be no squad limit for the home team. Each team shall designate in writing prior to each contest
the 22 participants from the squad who are eligible to compete in that contest. (6/95, 6/00, 6/05, 6/08, 6/09,
6/10)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 169

SPR 13-2-l
l.

Women’s Soccer Regulations

SPR 13-4

Video Policies.

For Conference contests, the host institution shall provide a flash drive with a copy of the game to the
visiting institution. Host institutions shall upload to the video exchange platform, InStat, video from the
weekend’s matches no later than 12:00 p.m. local time the day after the game. Video for Conference video
exchange will be filmed at an elevated midfield location that at a minimum shows half of the playing field
at all times. All home matches will be uploaded for video evaluation by the Conference coordinator of officiating. Each institution shall complete a test upload no later than September 1 annually. Only the last nonConference home match before the start of the season shall be made available for download to Conference
teams. Once the Conference season has started, any institution may download any game from the server.
(6/00, 6/01, 6/05, 6/09, 6/11, 6/12, 12/14, 8/15, 8/16, 7/19)
3. Awards.
The Conference soccer coaches shall select recipients for all soccer awards. Balloting shall be conducted following the completion of the Conference schedule. Coaches may nominate players from their teams, but may not
vote for themselves or for their own players for any of the awards. (6/95, 6/00)
a. All Conference Team.
The all-Conference team shall consist of a 12-player first team (three forwards, three midfielders, three defenders, two wild card positions and one goalkeeper) and 12-player second and third teams with the same
position allocations as the first team. Using a ballot provided by the Conference office, coaches shall vote
for nominated players in rank order by position and shall use a weighted voting method. Members of the
first team shall be provided an award from the Conference. Members of the second and third teams shall
be provided a certificate by the Conference. The coaches shall also select a 12-member all-freshman team
regardless of position, which shall be recognized in a Conference media release. (6/95, 2/99, 6/99, 6/00,
6/01, 6/05, 6/07,6/17)
(1) Nomination Procedure.
At the end of the season, each coach shall submit to the Conference office a rank-ordered list of nominees for the all-Conference team from his/her own team. (6/00, 6/09, 8/14, 11/16, 6/17)
b. Individual Awards.
An individual award from the Conference shall be provided to the Coach of the Year, Forward of the Year,
Midfielder of the Year, Defensive Player of the Year, Goalkeeper of the Year, and the Freshman of the Year
in women’s soccer. Using a ballot provided by the Conference office, coaches shall vote for one individual
for each award. The coach and student-athlete receiving the highest point totals shall be named Conference
Coach of the Year, Forward of the Year, Midfielder of the Year, Defensive Player of the Year, Goalkeeper of
the Year, and Freshman of the Year. The Forward of the Year, Midfielder of the Year, Defensive Player of the
Year, Goalkeeper of the Year, and Freshman of the Year shall be members of the all-Conference first team if
not already voted to the first team. (6/95, 5/97, 6/00, 8/14, 8/16, 6/17)
(1) Nomination Procedure.
For each of the Conference individual awards, each coach shall nominate no more than one from the
coach’s own team. (6/01, 6/17)
4. Meetings of Coaches.
There shall be an annual meeting of the women’s soccer coaches to be held on a date and time established by
the Conference office. The attendance of each head coach is mandatory. (6/95, 6/00)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 170

Softball Regulations

SPR 14-1

SPR 14-1-c-(1)

CHAPTER 14—SOFTBALL REGULATIONS
1. Playing Season Policies.
a. Championship Determination.
The team with the highest won-lost percentage during Conference play shall be the Conference champion.
This shall apply even in the event one or more teams do not play the full Conference schedule. If that percentage is shared by more than one team, a co-championship shall exist. (6/92), 7/22)
b. NCAA Automatic Qualifier.
The winner of the post-season Conference Tournament shall represent the Conference in the NCAA Division I Softball Tournament. (7/22)
(1) Championship Ties.
In the event of a percentage tie for the Conference championship, the following procedure shall be used
to determine the Conference’s automatic qualifier for the NCAA Division I Softball Championship.
(6/92, 10/01)
(a) The regular-season Conference record of each of the tied teams against the other team(s) with
which it is tied shall be determined. The team with the best record in this competition shall participate as the Conference’s automatic qualifier for the NCAA Division I Softball Championship. If
a team is eliminated as a result of this procedure and a tie still exists, this procedure shall be reapplied to the remaining tied teams. (10/01, 10/02)
(b) If a tie still exists, the tied teams’ record in regular-season Conference play against the next highest placed team(s) in the Conference standings shall be determined, including any team(s) already
eliminated through the tie-breaking procedure. This procedure shall continue through an evaluation of competitive records of the tied teams against all teams in the Conference in the order of their
placement in the standings until the tie is broken. In the event of a tie among two or more teams
lower in the standings when comparing records, each team’s combined record against the two or
more tied teams shall be determined. If a tied team is eliminated as a result of this procedure and a
tie still exists, the tie-breaking procedure shall revert to step (a) above. (10/01, 10/02)
(c) If a tie still exists, then the Conference’s automatic qualifier for the NCAA Division I Softball
Championship shall be determined by a coin flip conducted by the Commissioner. (10/01)
c. Conference Schedule.
Each Conference team shall schedule one three-game series against every other team. The season shall last
nine weeks, with one team having a bye each week. All three games of a given series shall be played at
the home site of one of the teams. Games shall be scheduled on Friday-Saturday-Sunday, except (1) games
scheduled on Easter Weekend and during the final week of the season shall be played on Thursday-FridaySaturday, and (2) the opening series for quarter institutions completing final exams that are scheduled
away from home shall be played on Saturday-Sunday-Monday to lessen interference with final examinations. Traditional rival games shall be placed randomly in the schedule. Non-Conference games shall be
scheduled following the completion of Conference scheduling. (6/87, 6/92, 12/92, 6/94, 5/97, 2/99, 6/02,
6/04, 6/09, 10/10, 10/12, 8/13)
(1) Rescheduling Policies.
If a game is postponed for any reason, it shall be rescheduled as follows: (6/88, 6/92, 12/92, 1/93,
12/93, 12/95, 6/00, 10/09)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 171
Updated 7/1/22

SPR 14-1-c-(1)

Softball Regulations

SPR 14-2-d

(a) If a game is postponed the first or second day of a series and cannot be played on its scheduled
day, the game shall be rescheduled as part of a doubleheader the next day. No more than two
games shall be played on any one day. Completion of a halted game counts as one of the two games
allowed on any given day. (10/09, 10/10, 10/12)
(b) For the first or second game of a series, any suspended game may not resume later than 11:00
p.m. that day, and no new inning may begin after midnight. Any inning in progress shall be completed. When the applicable time limit is reached, the game will be called and considered a regulation game if legal by rule. If not legal by rule, and followed by a game the next day, it will be
declared a halted game and completed the next day. Games that are not regulation games and
cannot be completed on subsequent days shall be declared “no game” and will not be rescheduled.
(10/09, 10/10)
(c) If the third game of a series is suspended and is not a regulation game by rule, it shall be declared “no game” and will not be rescheduled. (10/09)
(d) Any game that is postponed shall not begin after 9:00 p.m. (10/10)
(e) Any suspended game that is part of a doubleheader which is legal by rule will be considered a
regulation game. (10/12)
d. Visiting Team Practice Time
The host institution shall provide the visiting team with a two-hour block of time for practice before 9:00
p.m. on the day prior to the first game of each Conference series. The practice time is to be provided on the
playing field if weather permits, or an alternative indoor facility, if available. (12/19)
2. Conference Championships.
a. Competition Site.
The Conference Softball Tournament Championships shall meet all relevant NCAA automatic qualification
requirements. The team tournament will be a nine team tournament where the #8 and #9 seeded teams
compete in a play in game with the winner advancing to a traditional eight team single elimination bracket.
Teams shall compete in one game per day. (7/22)
b. Competition Date.
The Conference Softball Tournament Championships shall take place on Wednesday through Saturday the
week of the NCAA softball selection date. The tournament shall be conducted on the following rotation
basis witht the host bearing the responsibility of all expenses associated with hosting. (7/22)
c. Maximum Effort.
Per AR 4-4, Conference members are expected to compete in Conference championships in sports they
sponsor, and coaches are expected to attempt to field their strongest team to compete in single site Conference championships. (7/22)
d. Squad Size.
There shall be a squad size limit of 22 for the Conference Tournament. (7/22)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 172
Updated 7/1/22

Softball Regulations

SPR 14-2-d
Year
2022-23
2023-24
2024-25
2025-26

Host Institution
Arizona
Stanford
Oregon
Arizona State

Year
2026-27
2027-28
2028-29
2029-30
2030-31
(7/22)

SPR 14-3-e-(1)
Host Institution
UCLA
Washington
Utah
California
Oregon State

3. Game Policies.
a. Bat Testing.
All bats to be used in a Conference series shall undergo barrel compression testing using the NCAA battesting protocol prior to the first game of each series. The testing must be done by an institutional administrator of the host team at least two hours and 15 minutes prior to game time for the home team, and at least
two hours before game time for the visiting team. Bats which pass the test will have a sticker affixed to them
on the taper; bats which fail the test will be confiscated by the administrator and sent to the Conference
office to be forwarded to the NCAA per the established NCAA protocol. In the event of machine failure or
malfunction, testing will be suspended for that series. (10/11, 10/12)
b. Competition Site.
All Conference games are to be played on the field of the scheduled home team, except by mutual agreement of the appropriate athletics department administrators. When, because of extenuating circumstances,
a substitute home field is required, the appropriate athletics department administrator of the home team is
required to notify all affected teams at least five days in advance of the scheduled games.
The competition site must include a dirt infield, minimum NCAA distance requirements, and a safe seating area for both teams. If these requirements cannot be met, the game shall be rescheduled. The playing field must meet minimum NCAA specifications and its infield must be dragged between games of a
doubleheader. The competition site must include dugouts separated from spectator seating areas, a visible
scoreboard, and a restroom in close proximity to the playing field. The use of infield tarps shall be required.
(12/90, 6/93, 10/08)
c. Electronic Devices.
All electronic devices, with the exception of a mobile phone which may be used only by the team trainer,
must be turned off during games. Umpires shall warn the head coach of the offending team upon the first
instance of a violation of this rule. Subsequent violations shall result in the ejection of the head coach.
(10/12)
d. Game Times.
For non-televised games, the home team shall establish the game times for the first two games of a Conference series, with the game on the final day to start no later than noon. Game times for non-televised games
may be changed by mutual consent of the participating coaches. Game times for televised games shall be
established by the Conference office. (6/00, 6/04, 10/00, 10/01, 10/03, 10/04, 10/07, 10/09, 10/11, 12/13)
e. Playing Rules.
Contests shall be conducted under the NCAA Softball Rules except as modified below. (6/92, 6/98)
(1) Ball Rotation.
There will be no ball rotation between innings or after foul balls. The pitcher shall have a choice of ball
as long as there is no prolonged delay of action. (3/87)
2022-23 Handbook • Page 173

SPR 14-3-e-(2)

Softball Regulations

SPR 14-3-e-(11)

(2) Dragging of Infield.
A grounds crew shall be present on campus for the duration of all Conference games and shall dress
the infield in the top of the fourth inning (hand-dragging, no redrawing of lines or watering). (12/17)
(3) Field Side Monitors.
A replay system shall be available on monitors in the venue for use by game officials under the playing
rules. (7/22)
(4) Forfeit Time.
There shall be no Conference forfeit time. A game which does not begin within 45 minutes of its scheduled starting time requires rescheduling of the game. All efforts shall be made to reschedule on the
same or following day. (3/87, 6/92)
(5) Ground Rules.
Ground rules shall be provided in writing by the host institution to the plate umpire to allow the umpire to review them with representatives of both teams during the pregame meeting. (6/01)
(6) Inclement Weather.
Inclement weather shall include a temperature that has dropped below 32 degrees Fahrenheit (or wind
chill of 32 degrees Fahrenheit). Internet resources providing weather information shall be made available by the host institution. (10/11, 12/18))
(7) Intermission.
The umpires and coaches of the competing teams shall mutually agree upon the length of the intermission between games of a doubleheader. The intermission shall last from 15‑30 minutes. (6/92)
(8) Official Ball.
The official ball used for all Conference contests shall be the official ball used for NCAA championships. The host institution shall provide a minimum of 18 game-worthy balls for play and two new
game balls for warm-up for the visiting team. (3/87, 6/89, 11/05, 10/08, 2/17)
(9) Official Scorer.
The host institution shall provide a well-trained and knowledgeable scorekeeper for all home Conference games. A current rule book and National Softball Coaches Association Scoring Manual shall be
available at the scorer’s table which shall be stationed away from both teams and close to the plate umpire. The official scorebook shall provide the records that shall be used by both teams in the compilation
of statistics. A copy of the NCAA Box Score Form for both games of a doubleheader shall be provided
to the visiting team at the conclusion of the second game. (6/88, 6/92)
(10)Protests.
All protests shall be handled in accordance with NCAA Softball Playing Rules. If a protest from a
Conference game is upheld, the game shall be declared “no contest” and will not be rescheduled to be
replayed from the point of the protest. (6/92, 5/09, 10/09)
(11) Tiebreaker.
The tiebreaker rule shall not be used. (10/00)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 174
Updated 7/1/22

SPR 14-3-e-(12)

Softball Regulations

SPR 14-3-f

(12)Time Limit.
Softball games played on a day when the visiting team is traveling by commercial airline, a time limit
shall be implemented of three-and-one-half hours from the start of the game or four hours before the
scheduled flight time, whichever is later, with no new inning beginning after the time limit has been
reached. Any inning in progress shall be completed. If a regulation game (per NCAA rules) has been
played when the time limit is reached, it shall be declared a regulation game. Institutions may mutually
agree to extend the time limit to complete the game. Games which are not regulation games by rule
shall be declared “no contest”. (10/06, 10/09, 12/13, 12/18)
(13)Uniforms.
The host team shall wear light uniforms and the traveling team shall wear dark uniforms for the first
and third games of the series and the home team shall wear dark and the visiting team shall wear light
for the second game. Uniform color changes may be made by mutual agreement of the coaches of the
competing teams as long as the uniform colors contrast. (6/88, 5/90, 6/92, 6/12, 2/17)
f.

Pregame Warm-Up.

Field preparation, which includes dragging, drawing of lines and first watering, shall be completed two
hours prior to game time. The visiting team shall be provided with the following: four soft toss areas protected by soft nets; two batting cages with protective screens; one bucket of softballs and a batting tee in
each batting cage; either one bucket of softballs or one bucket of dimpled balls in each of the soft net areas;
and two buckets of warm-up balls in the dugout. (10/04, 10/08)
The home coach will specify whether hitting is done on the field, in the cages, or both, and whether hitting
time is shared or exclusive to each team. Each head coach must provide the Conference office with the hitting format prior to the season; once established, the format may be changed only by mutual consent of the
head coaches, unless weather conditions preclude on-field hitting. If conditions require alternate practice
arrangements, available amenities must be the same for both teams. (2/17, 12/17)
On days when classes are in session, the home coach will specify if the home or visitor will hit first, with
notification to the visitors a minimum of one week earlier. When classes are not in session, the home team
will hit first. (2/17)
Pre-game Format: If batting practice is held only in the batting cages.
Time to
First Pitch Action
1:49
Home Team - Batting Practice/Visiting Team Stretch and Warm-Up (30 mins)
1:19
Change-over on Field (5 minutes)
1:14
Visiting Team - Batting Practice/Home Team Stretch and Warm-Up (30 mins)
0:44
Change-over on Field (5 minutes)
0:39
Open warm-up/shared field (10 minutes) [No batted balls/outfield grass only]
0:29
Home Team Pre-game Infield Warm-up (5 minutes)
0:24
Visiting Team Pre-game Infield Warm-up (5 minutes)
0:19
Field preparation
(mandatory dragging of infield and redrawing of lines as necessary) (10 mins.)
0:09
Meeting with umpires (2 minutes)
0:07
National Anthem, Introductions
(6/88, 10/00, 10/04, 10/05, 10/09, 10/12, 12/14, 2/17, 12/18)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 175

SPR 14-3-f

Softball Regulations

SPR 14-4

Pre-game Format: If batting practice is held on the field (and cages) and field conditions
permitting.
Time to
First Pitch Action
2:09
Home Team - Batting Practice/Visiting Team Stretch and Warm-Up (40 mins)
1:29
Change-over on Field (5 minutes)
1:24
Visiting Team - Batting Practice/Home Team Stretch and Warm-Up (40 mins)
0:44
Change-over on Field (5 minutes)
0:39
Open warm-up/shared field (10 minutes) [No batted balls/outfield grass only]
0:29
Home Team Pre-game Infield Warm-up (5 minutes)
0:24
Visiting Team Pre-game Infield Warm-up (5 minutes)
0:19
Field preparation
(mandatory dragging of infield and redrawing of lines as necessary) (10 mins.)
0:09
Meeting with umpires (2 minutes)
0:07
National Anthem, Introductions
(6/88, 10/00, 10/04, 10/05, 10/09, 10/12, 12/14, 2/17, 12/17, 12/18, 12/19)
g. Public Address Announcer.
The public address announcer shall be in place 35 minutes before the scheduled start of the game and has
the responsibility of announcing the timing of the pre-game warm-up period. (6/92. 10/05)
h. Scouting
For in-season or post-season competition, no video, verbal, or written scouting report on any Conference
team shall be communicated to non-Conference institutions, except as required by NCAA or Conference
regulations. (10/08)
i.

Tickets for Visiting Institution.

The host institution shall make its best effort to provide tickets behind the visiting team dugout to the visiting institution. The visiting institution shall notify the host institution by the preceding Wednesday of the
number of tickets it requires for the games scheduled that week. (See also ER 1-7.) (6/03, 10/03)
j.

Umpire Policies.

See AR 6 and AR 6-16.
k. Videotape Policies.
Institutions shall provide a centerfield camera location for both the home and visiting teams. Institutional
personnel are not permitted to be stationed next to the centerfield camera. The visiting team shall be allowed to have an equal number of video cameras recording the game as the home team, and shall have
access to the same video locations. The locations of video cameras, and tagging and radar personnel shall
be identified to the Conference office before January 1 each year.. (10/01, 10/10, 12/17, 12/18)
4. Awards.
The Conference coaches shall select recipients for all softball awards. The timing of award selections shall be coordinated with NFCA awards timeline. Awards nominations and voting shall be completed online. Each coach
may nominate an unlimited number of his/her players for the all-Conference team, forwarding the nominations to the Conference office by the first Tuesday in May. Each head coach may also nominate one of his/her
players for the Athlete of the Year award. When submitting nominations, the coaches shall rank all nominees,
with one being the highest, two being the second highest, etc. Balloting conducted for individual awards shall
use a weighted voting method. The coaches shall also vote for the Coach of the Year. Coaches shall not be al2022-23 Handbook • Page 176

SPR 14-4

Softball Regulations

SPR 14-5

lowed to vote for themselves or for their own players for any of the awards. Conference post-season awards
shall be announced on the Wednesday of the last week of the regular season (prior to the final weekend’s
games).. (6/87, 6/89, 6/91, 6/92, 12/92, 12/93, 10/03, 6/11, 2/17, 12/17, 12/18, 7/19)
a. All-Conference Team.
The All-Conference softball first team shall consist of 20 players, the second and third teams shall each
consist of 10 players. Each member of the first team shall be provided an award from the Conference. Each
member of the second and third teams shall receive a certificate from the Conference. (6/89, 6/92, 12/93,
2/99, 6/99, 10/03, 6/11, 8/16, 7/22)
b. All-Defensive Team.
The all-Defensive Team shall be composed of nine players, selected by the coaches by the same process and
on the same timeline as the other season-ending awards. Each member of the team shall receive a certificate
from the Conference. (8/14)
c. All-Freshman Team.
The all-Freshman team shall consist of 14 players. Only true freshmen are eligible for selection to the team.
Each member of the team shall receive a certificate from the Conference. (6/07)
d. Individual Awards.
Individual awards from the Conference shall be provided to the Coach of the Year, the Athlete of the Year,
the Pitcher of the Year, the Freshman of the Year, the individual batting champion, and the best defensive
player. (6/92, 12/93, 2/99, 10/02)
(1) Individual Batting Championship.
The individual with the highest batting average in all games shall be declared the batting champion. In
order to qualify for the Conference batting championship, an individual must participate in 75 percent
of her team’s games and have a minimum of 2.5 plate appearances per game played by her team. If a
tie exists between two or more individuals when their batting averages are rounded to thousandths,
co-champions will be declared. (6/99, 10/10)
5. Meetings of Coaches.
There shall be an annual meeting of the softball coaches with the date and site to be established by the Conference office. The attendance of each head coach is mandatory. (6/90, 6/92)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 177
Updated 7/1/22

SPR 15-1

Men’s Swimming and Diving Regulations

SPR 15-2-e-(1)

CHAPTER 15—MEN’S SWIMMING AND DIVING REGULATIONS
1. Playing Season Policies.
a. Championships Determination.
The team and individual Conference champions in men’s swimming shall be determined at a Conference
championship meet. The individual Conference champions in men’s diving shall be determined at a separate Conference championship meet. (6/92)
b. Conference Schedule.
There shall be no required regular season Conference schedule in the sport of men’s swimming and diving.
However, any scheduled Conference dual meets shall take precedence over non-Conference dual meets.
Men’s swimming and diving teams are required once every three years to participate in a dual meet with
Utah in Salt Lake City. (6/92, 6/02, 6/17)
(1) Rescheduling Policies.
If a postponed swimming or diving meet cannot be rescheduled for an alternate site on the same day
it shall be cancelled. (7/92)
2. Meet Policies.
a. Computer-Based Entries.
The visiting institution shall provide an electronic or hard copy roster to the host institution prior to the
meet. The visiting institution may submit event entries for the meet which may be changed up to the time
of the event being called by the announcer or it may turn in entries by event, due at the conclusion of the
previous event. (6/10)
b. Diving Entries.
The use of divemeets.com shall be required for entering diving participants. (6/11)
c. Host Responsibilities.
The host institution of each meet shall provide a current list of hotel and motel rates, restaurants, travel
routes to the pool, parking, and the pool availability schedule to the visiting team. The visiting team shall
inform the host of its travel plans, accommodations, and planned time of arrival in town and at the swimming pool prior to the start of the meet. The host coach should make the pool availability schedule known
to the visiting team. (6/02)
d. Officials.
The starter-referee and a stroke and turn judge shall be certified USA Swimming officials. (6/02)
e. Playing Rules.
Regular season dual meets shall be conducted under the NCAA Men’s and Women’s Swimming and Diving Rules. (6/92, 6/02)
(1) Exhibition Swimmers.
When there is no mutual agreement by participating coaches, the default order of events shall be for
all non-scoring heats to be swum after the conclusion of the scoring heats in an event. The deadline
2022-23 Handbook • Page 178

SPR 15-2-e-(1)

Men’s Swimming and Diving Regulations

SPR 15-4-a

for determination shall be before competition, consistent with the deadline for determining events/
distances. (2/17)
3. Conference Diving Championships.
a. Entries.
Entry forms for the Conference Diving Championships must be received no later than one week before the
coaches’ meeting preceding the Championships. However, divers may be scratched, or designated as official or unofficial participants, up until the day before the beginning of the Championships. If, for any reason, an institution wishes to change its entries after the deadline, majority approval of the coaches through
a written ballot is required. (6/11)
(1) Fine.
A monetary fine shall be imposed for non-compliance with the deadline for submission of entries.
(6/17)
b. Playing Rules.
The Conference Diving Championships shall be conducted according to the NCAA Men’s and Women’s
Swimming and Diving Rules except as modified below. (6/88, 6/92)
(1) Judges.
Eight neutral judges, including one head referee, shall be used at the Conference Championships.
(6/05, 6/08, 6/11)
(2) Scoring.
Sixteen places will be scored on a 20-17-16-15-14-13-12-11-9-7-6-5-4-3-2-1 basis. The nine finalists will
be scored in order to finish in the finals and the remaining divers will be scored in the order of finish in
the preliminaries. (6/02)
(3) Ties In Diving Qualification.
In the case of a tie, the tied divers will advance to the finals. All divers in the finals will have equal opportunity to score wherever they finish in the finals. If a tie occurs in the finals, it will not be broken. A
duplicate award(s) will be provided to the individual(s). (6/87, 6/02)
c. Site.
The Conference Diving Championships shall be conducted by the Conference office at the indoor facility at
Federal Way, Washington. (6/95, 6/02, 6/09)
4. Conference Swimming Championships.
a. Date and Site.
The Conference Championships shall be conducted by the Conference office three weeks prior to the NCAA
Championships. It is recommended that the Conference Championships be conducted only in indoor facilities that are adequate in length and width, and in diving, locker, and spectator facilities. (5/69, 5/78, 6/92,
6/09, 8/15)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 179

Men’s Swimming and Diving Regulations

SPR 15-4-b

SPR 15-4-d-(1)

b. Entries.
(1) Entry Form and Deadlines.
Entry forms for the Conference Men’s Swimming Championships must be received by the Conference
office or its designee no later than one week prior to the coaches’ meeting preceding the Championships. Coaches shall designate their official and unof﻿ficial athletes 30 minutes after the coaches’ meeting preceding the Championships. If, for any reason, an institution wishes to change its entries after the
forms have been received, majority approval of the coaches through a written ballot is required. (5/66,
4/87, 4/90, 6/95, 6/02, 6/04, 6/10, 6/12, 12/18)
(2) Fine.
A monetary fine shall be imposed for non-compliance with the deadline for submission of entries.
(6/17)
(3) Event Limitations.
An individual swimmer who is an official entrant is permitted to swim (compete for points) in seven
events, of which no more than three may be individual events. The official entrant also may swim in
additional events (both individual events and relays) on an unofficial basis. Unofficial entrants may
participate in individual event preliminaries and exhibition relays. (6/65, 4/87, 4/89, 6/02)
(4) Scratches and Official Swims.
Changes to entries may be made according to the following deadlines: (4/87, 6/02, 6/04, 10/05, 6/10)
Changes to:

Deadline:

Day 1 events

30 minutes after coaches’ meeting prior to Day 1 (6/04)

Day 2 events

30 minutes after start of Day 1 finals (6/04)

Day 3 events

30 minutes after start of Day 2 finals (6/04)

Day 4 events

30 minutes after start of Day 3 finals (6/04)

c. Expense Sharing.
The event management costs, Championships mementos, and travel expenses (airfare and ground transportation) for each team shall be shared equally by the competing institutions. Travel expenses may be paid
for up to 27 individuals per team. (6/88, 6/92, 6/05, 6/12, 7/19)
d. Format.
The Conference Championships shall be conducted as a four-day event beginning Wednesday afternoon.
Teams may not depart campus for the Championships prior to Tuesday. Practice in the competition pool is
prohibited prior to 12:00 p.m. on the Tuesday prior to the Championships. (6/65, 5/69, 6/94, 6/95, 6/98,
6/02, 6/03, 10/03, 10/04, 6/05, 6/12, 8/16)
(1) 1650 Freestyle.
Timed final heats of the 1650 freestyle event shall be held during the final day of the Championships.
The final heat shall be held to begin the evening session. All other heats shall be concluded one hour
before the start of the evening session. (6/02, 10/03)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 180

SPR 15-4-d-(2)

Men’s Swimming and Diving Regulations

SPR 15-4-d-(7)

(2) Breaks.
There will be a 45 minute relay break prior to the 800 freestyle relay and a 30-minute relay break prior
to the 200 freestyle relay, 400-yard medley relay and 400-yard freestyle relay. (6/02, 10/03, 7/22)
(3) Finals.
Three heats of finals will be held for all events on the Championships program with the bonus consolation race and the consolation finals immediately preceding the championship finals race in each
individual event. (1/66, 4/86, 6/99, 6/02)
(4) Conference Invitational Meet.
The Conference Invitational, which is held the day following the Conference Men’s Swimming Championships, shall be conducted using preliminary and final heats. The preliminary session will be followed by the finals sessions of consolation and championship finals. (6/02)
(5) Relays.
Relays shall be conducted as timed final events. Exhibition heats of the 200-yard freestyle, 200-yard
medley, 400-yard freestyle, 400-yard medley and 800-yard freestyle relay shall be swum prior to scoring heat(s). The A relay team shall be seeded before teams B and C. (12/67, 4/87, 6/95, 5/97, 6/02,
12/18)
(6) Schedule of Events.
The order of events shall be as follows (10/03, 10/19, 12/21)
Wednesday, p.m.
200 Medley Relay (timed finals)
45-minute break
800 Freestyle Relay (timed finals)
Thursday, Prelims: a.m. Finals: p.m.
500 Freestyle
200 Individual Medley
50 Freestyle
200 Freestyle Relay (timed finals)

Friday, Prelims: a.m. Finals: p.m.
400 Individual Medley
100 Butterfly
200 Freestyle
100 Breaststroke
100 Backstroke
400 Medley Relay (timed finals)
Saturday, Prelims: a.m. Finals: p.m.
1650 Freestyle (timed finals)
200 Backstroke
100 Freestyle
200 Breaststroke
200 Butterfly
400 Freestyle Relay (timed finals)

The meet referee shall provide a schedule of events that includes a start time for each event. Evening
sessions shall begin at 6:00 p.m. (6/02, 10/03)
(7) Time-Standard Trials.
Time-standard trials shall be swum at the conclusion of both the morning and evening sessions. Each
competitor, or institution in the case of a relay event, is limited to one time-standard trial per event per
meet. Whenever a time-standard trial is conducted all appropriate officials of that meet or meet session
shall be used to officiate the time-standard trial. NCAA conduct rules as well as NCAA-approved starting, judging, and timing procedures must be applied to each time-standard trial. (6/02)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 181
Updated 7/1/22

SPR 15-4-e

Men’s Swimming and Diving Regulations

SPR 15-4-h-(4)

e. Host Responsibilities.
(1) Conference Championships.
The Conference office, at least one month in advance of the Championships meet, shall assemble a
Championships information packet and notify the participating institutions of the time schedule for
the meet, giving details on the meet and such related details as housing, parking, coaches’ meetings,
and publicity needs, and shall inform the participating institutions of the deadline for eligibility lists.
The Conference office is responsible for compilation and copies of entry lists. (6/02, 6/12)
(2) Conference Invitational Meet.
It is the Conference office’s responsibility to register the Conference Invitational Meet and receive proper approval for the meet from the NCAA Division I Swimming and Diving Committee according to
prescribed guidelines. Further, the Conference office shall administer the Conference Invitational meet
which shall be held the day after the Conference Men’s Swimming Championships. (6/02, 6/12)
f.

Maximum Effort.

Per AR 4-4, Conference members are expected to compete in Conference championships in sports they
sponsor, and coaches are expected to attempt to field their strongest team to compete in single site Conference championships. (7/22)
g. Officials.
There shall be a sufficient number of officials to properly conduct the Championships. There shall be no
more than six stroke and turn officials at the Championships. (6/99, 6/02)
h. Playing Rules.
The Conference Men’s Swimming Championships shall be conducted according to the NCAA Men’s and
Women’s Swimming and Diving Rules except as modified below. (6/92)
(1) Appeals Committee.
The Appeals Committee shall consist of all head coaches and the meet referee. The head coaches shall
vote on an appeal and in case of a tie, the referee shall cast a tie-breaking vote. The Appeals Committee may not consider appeals of the judgment decisions of the starters, stroke, turn, and relay take-off
judges (4/87, 7/20)
(2) Lane Assignment.
All eight lanes shall be used for bonus consolation, consolation, and finals heats for all events. (5/84,
4/89, 6/94, 6/95, 5/97, 6/02, 6/07)
(3) Scoring.
Sixteen places will be scored on a 20-17-16-15-14-13-12-11-9-7-6-5-4-3-2-1 basis. Relay events will score
seven places on a 40-34-32-30-28-26-24 basis. (11/65, 12/67, 5/73, 4/86, 4/87, 6/92, 6/95, 6/09, 10/10)
(4) Timed Trials.
Timed trials may be held following the preliminary and final session on each day of the Championships, except that timed trials for the 200-freestyle relay may be also be held prior to a preliminary session. If an A relay team is disqualified during a preliminary timed trial, the institution may not enter
a team in the finals of that relay event. If a B or C relay team is disqualified during a preliminary time

2022-23 Handbook • Page 182
Updated 7/1/22

SPR 15-4-h-(4)

Men’s Swimming and Diving Regulations

SPR 15-5-a

trial, the student-athletes on the disqualified team shall not be eligible to swim in the finals of that relay
event. (5/97)
i.

Qualifying Standards.

There shall be no qualifying standards for the Championships. (1/65, 5/69, 4/86, 2/87)
j.

Seeding.

Seeding for all events shall be based on any time achieved during the current season. If an event has not
been swum during the current season, the entry must be submitted with “no time” and seeded appropriately. Unofficial swimmers shall be seeded with official swimmers into preliminary heats according to their
official times, except in the 1650 where the heat swum in the finals session will include official entries only.
(6/87, 4/89, 6/99, 6/00, 6/02)
k. Squad Limit.
The maximum limit on the number of official entrants for each institution shall be 24, with divers counting
one-half. These entrants will be the designated scorers for each institution. (1/66, 5/66, 12/67, 1/76, 4/79,
2/87, 12/17)
(1) Unofficial Entrants.
In addition to the official entrants, eight additional individuals may compete unofficially in the preliminary heats and in the exhibition competition following the final heats. Each of the additional eight
individuals must pay at least $500 to cover his own transportation, lodging, and meal expenses, but
must travel to the meet with the team and shall be a part of the official party and under supervision of
the coaches at all times. (2/87, 6/09, 1/12, 12/17)
l.

Team Seating.

The order in which teams select their seating location shall be based upon the order of finish from the previous year’s Championships. (6/10, 6/11)
m. Timing Devices.
Automatic timing equipment must be used with two-button semi-automatic and two manual watches per
lane used as back up. (11/65, 12/67, 5/73, 6/92, 6/02, 12/18)
n. Timing Splits.
Timing splits shall be recorded automatically for the lead-off swimmer in all relays, and at the 500-yard and
1000-yard marks in the 1650-yard freestyle. All other splits must be requested. (4/87)
5. Awards.
The Conference men’s swimming coaches shall select recipients for all men’s swimming awards. The Conference men’s diving coaches shall select recipients for all men’s diving awards. Balloting conducted for individual awards shall use a weighted voting method. (6/92, 6/93, 6/11, 8/15, 12/18)
a. Individual Awards.
Individual awards from the Conference office shall be provided to the Coach of the Year, the Athlete of the
Year, and the Freshman of the Year in men’s swimming and the Coach of the Year, the Diver of the Year,
and the Freshman of the Year in men’s diving. Balloting shall be conducted by the Conference office and
completed after the NCAA Championships. (6/92, 6/93, 2/99, 12/18)
2022-23 Handbook • Page 183

SPR 15-5-b

Men’s Swimming and Diving Regulations

SPR 15-6

b. Championship Awards.
A Swimmer of the Meet and Diver of the Meet shall be selected by the coaches at the conclusion of the Conference Championships and each shall receive an award from the Conference. (6/04, 6/07)
6. Meetings of Coaches.
There shall be an annual meeting of the men’s swimming coaches. The attendance of each head coach is mandatory. The Conference office will also provide travel expenses for one diving coach chosen by the diving coaches
to represent both the men’s and women’s diving programs to attend the annual meeting. (6/92, 10/05, 10/11,
8/16, 12/17)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 184

SPR 16-1

Women’s Swimming and Diving Regulations

SPR 16-2-c-(1)

CHAPTER 16—WOMEN’S SWIMMING AND DIVING REGULATIONS
1. Playing Season Policies.
a. Championships Determination.
The team and individual Conference champions in women’s swimming shall be determined at a Conference championship meet. (6/92, 6/01)
b. Conference Schedule.
Utah and Washington State shall compete in dual meets against four of the six southern institutions (i.e.,
Arizona, Arizona State, California, Stanford, UCLA, USC) each year and shall compete in dual meets
against all six southern institutions twice in a three-year period. The six southern institutions shall compete
in dual meets against Utah and Washington State each year and shall compete in dual meets against Utah
and Washington State twice in a three-year period. Annual dual meets between the southern institutions
and between the northern institutions may also be scheduled. Meets shall be scheduled on dates mutually
agreed upon by the coaches of the involved teams and shall be confirmed by April 1 prior to the meet.
Any scheduled Conference dual meets shall take precedence over non-Conference dual meets. (4/88, 6/92,
6/01, 10/12, 12/19)
(1) Rescheduling Policies.
If a postponed swimming or diving meet cannot be rescheduled for an alternate site on the same day
it shall be cancelled. (7/92)
2. Meet Policies.
a. Entry Submission Procedures.
The visiting institution shall provide an electronic or hard copy roster to the host institution prior to the
meet. The visiting institution may submit event entries for the meet which may be changed up to the time
of the event being called by the announcer or it may turn in entries by event, due at the conclusion of the
previous event. The use of divemeets.com shall be required for entering diving participants. (6/10, 6/11)
b. Host Responsibilities.
The host institution of each meet shall provide a current list of hotel and motel rates, restaurants, travel
routes to the pool, parking, and the pool availability schedule to the visiting team. The visiting team shall
inform the host of its travel plans, accommodations, and planned time of arrival in town and at the swimming pool prior to the start of the meet. The host coach should make the pool availability schedule known
to the visiting team. (6/02)
c. Playing Rules.
Conference contests shall be conducted under the NCAA Men’s and Women’s Swimming and Diving Rules
except as modified below. (6/92, 2/17)
(1) Officials.
The starter-referee and a stroke and turn judge for all Conference dual meets shall be certified U.S.
Swimming officials. (4/88)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 185

SPR 16-2-c-(2)

Women’s Swimming and Diving Regulations

SPR 16-4-a

(2) Exhibition Swimmers.
When there is no mutual agreement by participating coaches, the default order of events shall be for
all non-scoring heats to be swum after the conclusion of the scoring heats in an event. The deadline
for determination shall be before competition, consistent with the deadline for determining events/
distances. (2/17)
3. Conference Diving Championships.
a. Playing Rules.
The Conference Diving Championships shall be conducted according to the NCAA Men’s and Women’s
Swimming and Diving Rules except as modified below. (6/88, 6/92)
(1) Judges.
Eight neutral judges, including one head referee, shall be used at the Conference Championships.
(6/05, 6/08, 6/11)
(2) Scoring.
Twenty-four places will be scored for individual events on a 32-28-27-26-25-24-23-22-20-17-16-15-1413-12-11-9-7-6-5-4-3-2-1 basis. The eight finalists will be scored in order of finish in the finals and the
remaining divers (9th up to 24th place) will be scored in the order of finish in the preliminaries. (6/01)
(3) Ties in Diving Qualification.
In the case of a tie, the tied divers will advance to the finals. All divers in the finals will have equal opportunity to score wherever they finish in the finals. If a tie occurs in the finals, it will not be broken. A
duplicate award will be provided to the individual(s). (6/02)
b. Site Rotation.
The Conference Diving Championships shall be conducted by the Conference office at the indoor facility at
Federal Way, Washington. (6/95, 6/02, 6/09)
c. Entries.
Entry forms for the Conference Diving Championships must be received no later than one week before the
coaches’ meeting preceding the Championships. However, divers may be scratched, or designated as official or unofficial participants, up until the day before the beginning of the Championships. If, for any reason, an institution wishes to change its entries after the deadline, majority approval of the coaches through
a written ballot is required. (6/11)
(1) Fine.
A monetary fine shall be imposed for non-compliance with the deadline for submission of entries.
(6/17)
4. Conference Swimming Championships.
a. Date and Site Rotation.
The Conference Championships shall be conducted by the Conference office three weeks prior to the
NCAA Division I Women’s Swimming and Diving Championships. It is recommended that the Conference
Championships be conducted only in indoor facilities that are adequate in length and width, and in diving,
locker, and spectator facilities. (6/87, 6/93, 6/94, 6/02, 6/09, 8/15)
2022-23 Handbook • Page 186

Women’s Swimming and Diving Regulations

SPR 16-4-b

SPR 16-4-d-(2)

b. Entries.
(1) Entry Form and Deadlines.
Entry forms for the Conference Women’s Swimming Championships must be received by the Conference office or its designee no later than one week prior to the coaches’ meeting preceding the Championships. Coaches shall designate their official and unofficial athletes 30 minutes after the coaches’
meeting preceding the Championships. If, for any reason, an institution wishes to change its entries after the forms have been received, majority approval of the coaches through a written ballot is required.
(6/04, 6/10, 6/12)
(2) Fine.
A monetary fine shall be imposed for non-compliance with the deadline for submission of entries.
(6/17)
(3) Event Limitations.
An individual swimmer who is an official entrant is permitted to swim (compete for points) in seven
events, of which no more than three may be individual events. The official entrant also may swim in
additional events (both individual events and relays) on an unofficial basis. Unofficial entrants may
participate in individual event preliminaries and exhibition relays.
(4) Scratches and Official Swims.
Changes to entries may be made according to the following deadlines: (6/04, 6/10)
Changes to:
Day 1 events
Day 2 events
Day 3 events
Day 4 events

Deadline:
30 minutes after the coaches’ meeting prior to Day 1 (6/04)
30 minutes after start of Day 1 finals (6/04)
30 minutes after start of Day 2 finals (6/04)
30 minutes after start of Day 3 finals (6/04)

c. Expense Sharing.
The event management costs, Championships mementos, and travel expenses (airfare and ground transportation) for each team shall be shared equally by the competing institutions. Travel expenses may be paid
for up to 27 individuals per team. (12/91, 6/92, 6/00, 6/05, 6/12)
d. Format.
The Conference Championships shall be conducted as a four-day event beginning Wednesday afternoon.
Teams may not depart campus for the Championships prior to Tuesday. Practice for swimming in the competition pool is prohibited prior to 12:00 p.m. the Tuesday prior to the Conference Championships. Practice
for diving in the competition pool is prohibited prior to 10:00 a.m. the Tuesday prior to the Conference
Championships. (6/92, 6/01, 6/02, 6/03, 10/03, 10/04, 6/05, 6/12, 8/16, 12/18)
(1) 1650 Freestyle.
Timed final heats of the 1650 freestyle event shall be held during the final day of the Championships.
The final heat shall be held to begin the evening session. All other heats shall be concluded one hour
before the start of the evening session. (6/94, 6/01, 6/02, 10/03)
(2) Breaks.
Breaks before relay events shall be a minimum of 45 minutes during the first day of the Championships
and at least 30 minutes on subsequent days. (6/01, 10/03, 6/12, 7/22)
2022-23 Handbook • Page 187
Updated 7/1/22

SPR 16-4-d-(3)

Women’s Swimming and Diving Regulations

SPR 16-4-d-(6)

(3) Finals.
Three heats of finals will be held for all events on the Championships program with the bonus consolation race and the consolation finals immediately preceding the championship finals race in each
individual event. (6/01)
(4) Conference Invitational Meet.
The Conference Invitational, which is held the day following the Conference Women’s Swimming
Championships, shall be conducted using preliminary and final heats. The preliminary session will be
followed by the finals sessions of consolation and championship finals. Requirements for the Conference Invitational shall adhere to NCAA invitational meet guidelines. (6/02, 6/11, 8/16)
(5) Relays.
Relays shall be conducted as timed final events. Exhibition heats of the 200-yard freestyle, 200-yard
medley, 400-yard freestyle, 400-yard medley, and 800-yard freestyle relay shall be swum prior to scoring heat(s). The A relay team shall be seeded before teams B and C. (6/87, 6/92, 6/94, 6/01, 6/02, 12/18)
(6) Schedule of Events.
The order of events shall be as follows: (10/03, 6/12/2, 2/17, 12/21)
Wednesday afternoon/evening
Men’s 1M diving prelims
200 Medley Relay (timed finals) (6:00 p.m.)
Men’s 1M diving finals (relay break)
800 Freestyle Relay (timed finals)
Thursday morning preliminaries
500 Freestyle (10:30 a.m.)
200 Individual Medley
50 Freestyle
Men’s 3M diving prelims
Women’s 1M diving prelims
Women’s 1M diving finals (15m after prelims)
Thursday evening finals
500 Freestyle (6:00 p.m.)
200 Individual Medley
50 Freestyle
Men’s 3M diving finals (during break)
200 Freestyle Relay (timed finals)
Friday morning preliminaries
400 Individual Medley (10:30a.m.)
100 Butterfly
200 Freestyle
100 Breaststroke
100 Backstroke
Women’s 3M diving prelims
Men’s platform diving prelims
Men’s platform diving finals

Friday evening finals
400 Individual Medley (6:00 p.m.)
100 Butterfly
200 Freestyle
100 Breaststroke
100 Backstroke
Women’s 3M finals
400 Medley Relay (timed finals)
Saturday morning preliminaries
(10:30 a.m.)
200 Backstroke
100 Freestyle
200 Breaststroke
200 Butterfly
Women’s platform diving prelims
Saturday evening finals
1650 Freestyle (timed finals) (6:00 p.m.)
200 Backstroke
100 Freestyle
200 Breaststroke
200 Butterfly
Women’s platform diving finals (during break)
400 Freestyle Relay (timed finals)

2022-23 Handbook • Page 188

SPR 16-4-d-(6)

Women’s Swimming and Diving Regulations

SPR 16-4-h-(2)

The meet referee shall provide a schedule of events that includes a start time for each event. Evening
sessions shall begin at 6:00 p.m. (6/02, 10/03)
(7) Time-Standard Trials.
Time-standard trials shall be swum at the conclusion of both the morning and evening sessions. Each
competitor, or institution in the case of a relay event, is limited to one time-standard trial per event per
meet. Whenever a time-standard trial is conducted all appropriate officials of that meet or meet session shall be used to officiate the time-standard trial. NCAA conduct rules as well as NCAA-approved
starting, judging, and timing procedures must be applied to each time-standard trial. (5/89, 6/01, 6/02)
e. Host Responsibilities.
(1) Conference Championships.
The Conference office, at least one month in advance of the Championships meet, shall assemble a
Championships information packet and notify the participating institutions of the time schedule for
the meet, giving details on the meet and such related details as housing, parking, coaches’ meetings,
and publicity needs, and shall inform the participating institutions of the deadline for eligibility lists.
The Conference office is responsible for compilation and copies of entry lists. (6/02, 6/12)
(2) Conference Invitational Meet.
It is the responsibility of the Conference office to register the Conference Invitational Meet and receive
proper approval for the meet from the NCAA Division I Swimming and Diving Committee according
to prescribed guidelines. Further, the Conference office shall administer the Conference Invitational
meet which shall be held the day after the Conference Women’s Swimming Championships. (6/01,
6/02, 6/12)
f.

Maximum Effort.

Per AR 4-4, Conference members are expected to compete in Conference championships in sports they
sponsor, and coaches are expected to attempt to field their strongest team to compete in single site Conference championships. (7/22)
g. Officials.
There shall be a sufficient number of officials to properly conduct the Championships. There shall be no
more than six stroke and turn officials at the Championships. (6/02)
h. Playing Rules.
The Conference Women’s Swimming Championships shall be conducted according to the NCAA Men’s
and Women’s Swimming and Diving Rules except as modified below. (6/87, 12/91, 6/01, 6/02)
(1) Appeals Committee.
The Appeals Committee shall be composed of all head coaches and the meet referee. The head coaches
shall vote on an appeal and, in case of a tie, the referee shall cast a tie-breaking vote. The Appeals Committee may not consider appeals of the judgment decisions of the starters, stroke, turn, and relay takeoff judges. (6/87, 6/01, 6/02)
(2) Lane Assignment.
All eight lanes shall be used for bonus consolation, consolation, and finals heats for all individual
events (6/02)
2022-23 Handbook • Page 189
Updated 7/1/22

SPR 16-4-h-(3)

Women’s Swimming and Diving Regulations

SPR 16-5-a

(3) Scoring.
Twenty-four places will be scored for individual events on a 32-28-27-26-25-24-23-22-20-17-16-15-1413-12-11-9-7-6-5-4-3-2-1 basis. Relay events shall score eight places on a 64-56-54-52-50-48-46-44 basis.
(6/87, 6/01, 6/09, 6/12, 6/18, 7/20)
i.

Qualifying Standards.

There shall be no qualifying standards for the Championships. (1/65, 5/69, 4/86, 2/87)
j.

Seeding.

Seeding for all events shall be based on any time achieved during the current season. If an event has not
been swum during the current season, the entry must be submitted with “no time” and seeded appropriately. Unofficial swimmers shall be seeded with official swimmers into preliminary heats according to their
official times, except in the 1650 where the heat swum in the finals session will include official entries only.
(6/99, 6/01, 6/02)
k. Squad Limit.
The maximum limit on the number of of﻿ficial entrants for each institution shall be 24, with divers counting
one-half. These entrants will be the designated scorers for each institution. (2/87, 5/88, 5/91, 6/99, 6/01,
6/02, 6/09, 6/10, 1/12, 8/14)
(1) Unofficial Entrants.
In addition to the official entrants, eight additional individuals may compete unofficially in the preliminary heats and in the time standard trials. Each of the additional eight individuals must pay at least
$500 to cover her own transportation, lodging, and meal expenses, but must travel to the meet with the
team and shall be a part of the official party and under supervision of the coaches at all times. Divers
entered unofficially shall count as one-half. (2/87, 6/99, 6/01, 6/09, 1/12, 8/14, 12/17)
l.

Team Seating.

The assignment of team seating at the Conference Championships shall be done by random draw based on
